[Amit Varma]: How did we get to episode 300? When I began the scene in the unseen almost 6 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: it was an experiment. I didn't understand podcasting and this show was so different
[Amit Varma]: then. But I kept myself open to learning and realised that all my priors about this medium
[Amit Varma]: were wrong. I did not have to cater to short attention spans. People want depth, they want
[Amit Varma]: nuance, they want serious discussion that is not about scoring points or gotcha moments.
[Amit Varma]: And they are interested in human beings as much as ideas. Over this time, the show has
[Amit Varma]: evolved from 20 minute glimpses of public policy to 2 hour deep dives into subjects
[Amit Varma]: to 5 hour conversations that are akin to oral history. And the deeper my dives, the deeper
[Amit Varma]: your engagement. So I want to thank all of you for the love you've given me which keeps
[Amit Varma]: me going. This is not just a matter of great numbers. This show is kept alive and financially
[Amit Varma]: viable by the contributions of listeners. To bring up an old trope of mine, your love
[Amit Varma]: ain't just some abstract thing. It's concrete and I feel it every day. So thank you again.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I celebrated episode 200 with a mega conversation curated by Shruti Rajgopalan,
[Amit Varma]: in which a whole bunch of my guests asked me questions. For episode 300, I've decided
[Amit Varma]: not to do something so elaborate, but just get a special guest. That's what I've done.
[Unknown]: And we had a special conversation. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Pratap Bhanu Mehta. And I was almost
[Amit Varma]: tempted not to record the intro for this episode because Pratap needs no introduction. Pratap
[Amit Varma]: is one of my intellectual heroes, and I've learned a lot from him over the years, not
[Amit Varma]: just from his writing, but his way of thinking about a subject. All of us, we dig deep as
[Amit Varma]: far as our capacity allows, and then we stop. And the narratives we have are the narratives
[Amit Varma]: we have. But Pratap digs deeper into whatever subject he cares about and keeps himself open
[Amit Varma]: more than anyone else I know. Whenever I read him or interact with him, I feel like I need
[Amit Varma]: to step back and learn that all my reading so far is inadequate. He was my guest in episode
[Amit Varma]: 186 of the show, and many people still refer to that as their favorite episode. Do listen
[Amit Varma]: to that if you haven't already. These two are like companion conversations in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that earlier episode was recorded remotely. And oddly enough, we hadn't met in person
[Amit Varma]: until I went to Delhi this August and invited him for this chat. We spoke about the world
[Amit Varma]: and the self, about the personal and the political, about how the shape of the world is shifting,
[Amit Varma]: and how we can try to make sense of it. There is more insight per minute in this conversation
[Amit Varma]: than in perhaps any episode I've recorded. And in it, you'll also hear him mention the
[Amit Varma]: great Dalit scholar Chandrabhan Prasad. And when I told him, hey, I invited Chandrabhan
[Amit Varma]: ji to the show and he declined, Pratap said, don't worry, I'll make it happen. And he did.
[Amit Varma]: And that episode actually released before this one three weeks ago. That's just one
[Amit Varma]: instance of the kindness I refer to. Anyway, check out this conversation. I loved it so
[Amit Varma]: much. But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called FutureStack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. FutureStack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees 2500
[Amit Varma]: if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Up Level Yourself. Pratap, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me. I'm so glad to be recording this in person. The last time we
[Amit Varma]: recorded was August 2020. And that of course had to be a remote recording because COVID
[Amit Varma]: and all of us were kind of hunkered down. And I wanted to start by sort of asking you
[Amit Varma]: how in these months, you know how life has changed in the sense that I often feel and
[Amit Varma]: looking at myself as well, that all of this, you know, when you move to a different way
[Amit Varma]: of life, for example, when I left full time employment, more than a decade and a half
[Amit Varma]: ago and started working, the texture of your day change, you know, what you do with your
[Amit Varma]: time changes, your incentives change in terms of the things that drive you to action and
[Amit Varma]: the things that don't. And that changes the work you do that changes the person you are,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And in a sense, you know, one COVID I think forced upon all of us a
[Amit Varma]: different kind of rhythm of existence, where for many men, certainly it we've had the luxury
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, perhaps a slower rhythm at times where you're not always up and about for many
[Amit Varma]: women, it's a faster, choppier rhythm, because there's so much more to deal with at home
[Amit Varma]: without household help, and so on and so forth. But in your case, how has the texture of your
[Amit Varma]: day changed in a sense? And would that same kind of change also apply in terms of no longer
[Amit Varma]: running an institution like in the past, you were running CPR, and then you were at Ashoka,
[Amit Varma]: and you're much more independent in a sense now. So how has change been for you in that
[Guest]: way?
[Guest]: Oh, my gosh. So look, at one level, you know, as we share the same profession, in some senses,
[Guest]: you know, we talk and write. And I think for that profession, control over your time has
[Guest]: always been, I think, much easier than in almost any other profession. And, you know,
[Guest]: so at one level, I think if you're a writer, you know, COVID was actually a godsend in
[Guest]: some ways. I mean, you had the luxury of just sitting and writing, you didn't have the usual
[Guest]: phone calls disturbing you. So the sense of control over your time, at least, I think
[Guest]: was immense. I think the flip side of it is that your sense of how the world operates,
[Guest]: I think subconsciously, I think changed quite dramatically without you realizing it. Partly,
[Guest]: I think, you know, the last two years have also coincided with lots of tectonic changes
[Guest]: in the world, geopolitical changes, economic changes. And I think what COVID did was just
[Guest]: add to that sense of uncertainty, you're just much less in command, as it were, or much
[Guest]: less confident about your own judgments about what's happening in the world. I mean, it's
[Guest]: like making a call in the virus, right? When to mask, when is it safe? When is it not safe?
[Guest]: So that sense of uncertainty, and I think anxiety, I think has also become a part of
[Guest]: a kind of existential, I think, you know, condition. But I have to say, I've also been
[Guest]: surprised by just how quickly the world has rebounded from COVID. I mean, yes, we can
[Guest]: talk about, you know, changes and rhythms. And I think, as I said, I think for our professions,
[Guest]: it's easier. It is gendered, as you rightly, you know, said. But if you travel the last
[Guest]: six to seven months, frankly, COVID seems like a distant gleam, at least in the public
[Guest]: space. I mean, obviously, it is affecting a lot of lives still. The death rates are
[Guest]: still quite high in many countries. And this has been true of humanity in general, right?
[Guest]: We always think of these catastrophic events, right? The Spanish influenza, right? You know,
[Guest]: humanity was back to being what it was two or three years later. So perhaps in a couple
[Guest]: of years, we look back and say, maybe it wasn't as tectonic a shift in our lifestyles, as
[Guest]: perhaps it should have been. That's also that's a good news story, because it shows a certain
[Guest]: kind of resilience. It may not be a good news story for that means is we're not learning
[Amit Varma]: the right lessons.
[Amit Varma]: So when you spoke about, you know, it changing the way you perceive how the world operates,
[Amit Varma]: or even right now, you spoke about, you know, learning the right lessons. Can you elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on those?
[Guest]: So, you know, one of the things, right, for the senses, which our generations have been
[Guest]: privileged, right? I mean, you can take any arbitrarily cut off date, people born in the
[Guest]: late 60s, early 70s. And given the privileged positions we've occupied, one, we've never
[Guest]: had to contemplate a truly human scale, global scale catastrophe in our lifetimes. I mean,
[Guest]: we had, we have no memory of what that is like, right? Our dominant mythology is constant
[Guest]: improvement, the promise of greater control over our environment, the promise of actually
[Guest]: pretty much being able to do anything at will, I mean, at least aspirationally, even if it's
[Guest]: not accessible to everyone, right. And so just the consciousness, right, that actually,
[Guest]: we might be at a moment where those things which we had relegated to the past, because
[Guest]: we were so confident of our control of nature, right, there will be no major pandemic, there
[Guest]: will be no major climate change induced catastrophe, or even if climate change affects it, it's
[Guest]: something we can control. Nuclear war, interestingly, right, non negligible risk. So I think we
[Guest]: are, for our generation, I think it's the first time where you're actually having to
[Guest]: think about those things that humanity periodically always had to throughout its existence till,
[Guest]: you know, till maybe 1945, you know, or something. So that's, I think, one, you know, and we
[Guest]: never know what those changes actually do. I think those changes will play in our psyche,
[Guest]: subconsciously and slowly. I mean, in a sense, we'll see that visible marks, I think, in
[Guest]: a while, because partly because of the global scale of these challenges, it's not, it's
[Guest]: not easy to come up with answers of what are we supposed to do about it. If you look at
[Guest]: the decline of civilisations, right, particularly climate induced decline of civilisations,
[Guest]: I mean, history is littered with civilisations, right, that were pretty confident. I mean,
[Guest]: we don't know how many of them declined in this valley or whatever. But these civilisations
[Guest]: continue until one day they don't, right. You just look at, you know, the heat wave
[Guest]: this year, right? I mean, the idea that the major rivers of every country from China to
[Guest]: France to the United States are running dry is truly staggering. I mean, what it actually
[Guest]: does to, you know, our sense of possibility. So I think it's for the first time again,
[Guest]: that we are having to think in planetary terms, because a planetary catastrophe is actually
[Amit Varma]: not a non-negligible possibility. So, you know, you kind of mentioned how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: civilisations assume they're dominant until one day they're not there. And that reminded
[Amit Varma]: me of this lovely quote by Douglas Adams, which I'm just going to sort of read out,
[Amit Varma]: quote, imagine a puddle waking up one morning and thinking, this is an interesting world
[Amit Varma]: I find myself in an interesting hole I find myself in fits me rather neatly, doesn't it?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it fits me staggeringly well, must have been made to have me in it. This is such
[Amit Varma]: a powerful idea that as the sun rises in the sky and the air heats up, and as gradually
[Amit Varma]: the puddle gets smaller and smaller, is still frantically hanging on to the notion that
[Amit Varma]: everything's going to be all right, because this world was meant to have a minute was
[Amit Varma]: built to have a minute. So the moment it disappears, catches him rather by surprise. I think this
[Amit Varma]: may be something we need to be on the watch out for stop code. And you know, when you
[Amit Varma]: speak about the inevitable, how progress is inevitable, that that notion that you know,
[Amit Varma]: the arc of history is going towards a good place. And I must confess that that's what
[Amit Varma]: I believed as well. I think it was a default way of thinking for a lot of people that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you assumed with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Berlin Wall breaking
[Amit Varma]: down all of that, you assume that it was indeed, as Fukuyama said, the end of history, though,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, that's a very misinterpreted essay. But that the general sentiment of
[Amit Varma]: the misinterpretation also was something that many people believed in, that we've solved
[Amit Varma]: many of these problems, the authoritarian horrors of the past are surely behind us.
[Amit Varma]: And wherever they do exist, it will gradually recede in front of the, you know, undeniable
[Amit Varma]: logic of freedom, and so on and so forth. And, and I think so many of us have had to
[Amit Varma]: sort of recast that notion in the last few years, to the extent that many will still
[Amit Varma]: say it's a cycle, but it's going to turn back, this moment can't last forever. You know,
[Amit Varma]: what are your thoughts on reconsidering this? And the thing is that once we decided that
[Amit Varma]: that is the way the world was, that progress was inevitable, we also build narratives to
[Amit Varma]: explain why that was so, and that fed into a framework through which we looked at the
[Amit Varma]: world. And if the fact is that progress wasn't inevitable, that we can go backwards, then
[Amit Varma]: all of those frameworks also collapse. So in what ways have you sort of changed your
[Amit Varma]: thinking? Like, what are the major ways in which you've kind of changed or refined your
[Amit Varma]: thinking in the last few years? And would you say that this is still something that
[Amit Varma]: intellectuals or thinkers or so on are, you know, coming to terms with?
[Guest]: Gosh, as always, what a wonderfully big and profound question. And, and, you know, you've
[Guest]: opened the door now to speculation. Hope you won't have bias regret. Maybe this is a good
[Guest]: moment to kind of step back a little bit from the immediate moment. And I think just using
[Guest]: Fukuyama as a kind of benchmark, I think, to look back at the arc of history over, let's
[Guest]: say, the last 150, 200 years, right? Now, it seems to me that, you know, when you and
[Guest]: I had a confidence in progress, broadly speaking, right? In a way, it had three different strands
[Guest]: to it. One is what you might call technological confidence. I mean, that's the project of
[Guest]: the modern world, which is increasing mastery over nature, right, to be able to deliver
[Guest]: pretty much what we want at whim, right? The different names to it, rationalization of
[Guest]: the world, where more and more of the world comes under our control, right? And our confidence
[Guest]: about that took this really radical form that we could actually remake nature, right? That
[Guest]: we could somehow remake the planetary system, we had a kind of infrastructure species in
[Guest]: some ways, right? You can literally alter the face of the globe. But now there are different
[Guest]: varieties of it, you know, not just science fiction fantasies, but you know, altering
[Guest]: your genes. So, that sense of the radical reconstitution of nature, not just mastery
[Guest]: of nature, radical reconstitution of nature is something that I think had become, I think,
[Guest]: common sense, right, for, I think, many of us. And if you look at the current moment,
[Guest]: the only people who seem to be optimists are people who are still in that techno solution
[Guest]: space. I mean, that's like a whole sort of, you know, different universe. What energy
[Guest]: crisis, you know, the cost of solar will be zero in five years, we'll be fine. What fruit
[Guest]: crisis, we can synthesize plant based proteins and labs, we'll be fine in five years, right?
[Guest]: But I think the question in some senses is whether this techno solutionism, right, is
[Guest]: actually the right or the adequate approach to this moment. So, that's, I think, one,
[Guest]: I think, you know, I think, in some senses, long term. The second project, which was,
[Guest]: I think, an interesting one, which I think comes out of the French revolutionary tradition,
[Guest]: but I think is at the heart of almost all modern politics, right, is creating a political
[Guest]: order that is a product of our conscious design, right, which, in a sense, not just reflects
[Guest]: our status as free and equal people, but in some senses, is not confined by the encumbrances
[Guest]: of historical necessity, right? There's something veiled about it, there's something legitimate
[Guest]: about it, there's something justified about it. And I think one of the paradoxes, I think,
[Guest]: of our particular moment is that ambition of creating a social order that would be justified
[Guest]: to all. That's actually the ambition we gave up the first, right? So, we think of the nation-state
[Guest]: form and capitalism, just to take two social forms, as kind of more or less necessary for
[Guest]: our social existence, in a way in which we aren't even taking nature as necessary for
[Guest]: our social existence, right? I mean, there's a kind of weight of necessity that comes to
[Guest]: our social arrangements, that is actually quite surprising. I mean, that in some senses,
[Guest]: you know, that's the paradox of modernity, right? We were supposed to remake our societies,
[Guest]: we've ended up remaking nature, without quite remaking our societies. And at this moment,
[Guest]: right, that poses a particular challenge, which is that if you actually have this crisis
[Guest]: around, let's say, climate change, around nature, around this project of mastery, are
[Guest]: these two institutional forms, the nation-state form, and broadly capitalism, I'm using it
[Guest]: loosely at the moment, are they actually fit for purpose for solving the problems that
[Guest]: we actually need to solve? Are they the solution? Are they in some sense, as part of the problem?
[Guest]: And how much of the kind of sense of crisis that we have is the sense that, you know,
[Guest]: they've delivered lots of goods. I mean, you can't imagine modern citizenship outside the
[Guest]: nation-state. You can't imagine liberating the individual in some senses, from the oppression
[Guest]: of tradition outside of the confines of the nation-state often. Capitalism, certainly
[Guest]: in some forms, at least, has delivered extraordinary levels of material prosperity to certain parts
[Guest]: of the world. But I think there is a palpable sense that we've kind of plateaued in some
[Guest]: senses on what they can actually provide, and whether they can actually solve anything
[Guest]: this problem. So, you know, it's an interesting moment where you're kind of opening yourself
[Guest]: up to at least much more bigger scale thinking, that maybe the solution will not just be tinkering
[Guest]: at the edges, it will require slightly more radically reimagination of our social forms,
[Guest]: holding on to what's important in them, right? But in some senses, creatively, I think transcending
[Guest]: that. The third, I think, feature, right, which, in some senses, was this question of,
[Guest]: and I know this is a subject that's close to your heart amongst others, you've written
[Guest]: eloquently about this, the dignity of the individual and individual freedom, right?
[Guest]: That both the enterprise of liberalism and democracy, psychologically, they rely on a
[Guest]: certain kind of presumptive trust that people have in each other, right? That's partly why
[Guest]: you can leave them to their own devices. But the presumptive trust is not just that they're
[Guest]: going to be good at making judgements about things that affect them. But the presumptive
[Guest]: trust also requires a certain kind of reciprocity. That's why in some senses, equality and liberty
[Guest]: have always gone together. I mean, it's equal liberty for all in some ways, right? That's
[Guest]: very important. And I think one of the challenges, I think, in some senses, we see is the foundations
[Guest]: of what creates societies where there is an adequate level of reciprocity, right? And
[Guest]: I think reciprocity is the key term here, because everything else follows from reciprocity,
[Guest]: right? Whether I respect your liberty, and you respect mine, I mean, that's a form of
[Guest]: reciprocity. What are the conditions under which forms of reciprocity are created, right,
[Guest]: that can sustain levels of trust? I don't think we have a good handle on that. Some
[Guest]: societies for a little while seem to have it a little more than others. But the crisis
[Guest]: of authoritarianism, the crisis of liberal democracy, the crisis of freedom is in part
[Guest]: this complete absence of reciprocity, right? Which makes any projects for furthering each
[Guest]: other's freedom seem almost impossible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and, you know, you went on Shruti's podcast, and you spoke about Adam Smith. And
[Amit Varma]: this is like one of the fundamental points you made, which, you know, made me think a
[Amit Varma]: lot about, you know, it's not just about self interest in Smith's work, it's about reciprocity.
[Amit Varma]: And that goes a bit deeper. In the last episode that we did together, like one of the things
[Amit Varma]: I mentioned that I think about, from time to time, is how, if I look at the story of
[Amit Varma]: human progress, especially perhaps since the Enlightenment, one narrative that is there
[Amit Varma]: is about how we are using reason, which of course, we are we are wired to have reason,
[Amit Varma]: but we are using reason to sort of mitigate the negative aspects of our hardwiring, right.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we have contradictory hardwiring, we are hardwired for both tribalism and altruism,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. But we mitigate the negative aspects of that by actually, you
[Amit Varma]: know, thinking about it and realizing that no, you know, I might be hardwired to have
[Amit Varma]: kids, but I don't want kids, or I might be hardwired to be tribalistic and hate the other
[Amit Varma]: but hey, no, we are all the same, right? And you use reason in that sense. And it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that that might, you know, in a way, again, there was an illusion of progress there,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, reason is proceeding. But in a way, it may be a bit of a losing battle,
[Amit Varma]: or at least a really difficult battle, if I look at modern times, because every newborn
[Amit Varma]: baby is born with the hardwiring that is there, but without, you know, the rest of the work
[Amit Varma]: remains. And it's so easy for those knobs to be turned, as it were the tribalism knob
[Amit Varma]: and the violence knob and all of those kind of knobs to be turned. So that's sort of what
[Amit Varma]: you know, what kind of worries me a bit. And in a sense, I think also, the tech solution
[Amit Varma]: solutionism that you mentioned, could also, you know, have relevance with how a lot of
[Amit Varma]: people think about the second problem that you mentioned about a political order and
[Amit Varma]: capitalism and all of that. And my sense is that we are the tech solution solutionism
[Amit Varma]: takes us to a space where we imagine that all problems are solvable. Now, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: all problems are not solvable, there will be a time the planet won't exist at all, there
[Amit Varma]: will be a time much before that, that humans won't exist on the planet. And those are long
[Amit Varma]: term problems, but we can push them away. But you know what I think, you know, capitalism
[Amit Varma]: and building certain political orders with institutions and all of that can solve limited
[Amit Varma]: problems, but not deeper problems. For example, capitalism can help people get what they desire,
[Amit Varma]: but it cannot shape what they desire. Right? And if what they desire is not something that
[Amit Varma]: we with a liberal mindset would consider, hey, these are the things you should desire,
[Amit Varma]: then we sort of have an issue there. I mean, I'm kind of rambling a bit, but I totally
[Amit Varma]: get where you're coming from. And I'll ask you to double click on the second of those
[Amit Varma]: points. You know, in a different space, you've also written about how we are prisoners of
[Amit Varma]: an 18th century conception when it comes to the state and its institutions and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: So with your permission, can I back up to your very important point about reason, actually,
[Guest]: because I actually think it is something we don't get to discuss often. I mean, I think
[Guest]: in some ways, you know, I think we, as you said, reason has become, again, a common part
[Guest]: of our kind of ideological repertoire and we move forward with it. So when we think
[Guest]: of reason, right, and, you know, whether you take the Enlightenment Project, but not just
[Guest]: the Enlightenment Project, I mean, I think sometimes identifying reason with the Enlightenment
[Guest]: Project, you know, also makes it much more culturally specific than reason is. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, there have been rational people, rational thinkers all across, right? I think
[Guest]: we have to understand three or four things about reason, right? And this is the hard
[Guest]: part, I think. So one, I think is, look, even rationality as a history in some ways. And
[Guest]: by that, I mean, not the proposition that everything is relative to culture, right?
[Guest]: But things that are taken as expressions of rational behaviour will actually vary. And
[Guest]: in some senses, reason itself cannot adjudicate between that variation, right? What do you
[Guest]: want to optimise on in your life? Right? Lots of plausible candidates, right? Most of them
[Guest]: are probably rational candidates, right? I mean, you could make a case for them after
[Guest]: reflection, right? But reason in some senses is always going to under-determine many of
[Guest]: the ends we would want to actually pursue. And I think this is an insight I think pluralists
[Guest]: have had everywhere. I mean, whether it's kind of Jain Anekant Vards, or, you know,
[Guest]: Isaiah Berlin in some senses, right? That the idea that reason over-determines your
[Guest]: choices, right? The way we think of it in mathematics, once you've seen two plus two
[Guest]: equals four, you cannot but believe that and there is no other option, right? For most
[Guest]: of the things that in some senses matter to our lives, right? Reason will under-determine
[Guest]: your choices. And I think a lot of the pulls we feel around the conflicts of values, right?
[Guest]: The harder cases are one where there are actually between reasonable choices. It's not that
[Guest]: people I mean, it's not that somebody who says, look, I want to lead a somewhat traditional
[Guest]: sedate life, you know, like the comforts of community, like the comforts of predictability,
[Guest]: is actually being unreasonable, as opposed to somebody who says, look, I want to jet
[Guest]: set across the world, I want to sort of just mix cultures, I want to, I mean, you can make
[Guest]: plausible cases that they're actually both fulfilling ways of living a life, right? And
[Guest]: it's not clear that reason is going to be able to, in some senses, adjudicate between
[Guest]: them, right? So reason under-determines that. The second, I think, challenge with reason
[Guest]: is whether the cast of the world is inherently tragic. And by tragic, one just means the
[Guest]: idea that lots of good things cannot coexist together, right? So if you are building a
[Guest]: community that's actually optimising on familiarity, the comfort of knowing each other intimately,
[Guest]: versus building a community where you have the strength of, you know, weak ties, as it
[Guest]: were, or let's say, you're optimising on efficiency versus optimising on localism. Again, both
[Guest]: are reasonable, in some sense, but both cannot exist in the same social structure in the
[Guest]: same social space, right? And I think this is something I think many liberals did understand
[Guest]: that I think there is a kind of tragic cast to the world. And I think the excessively
[Guest]: rationalist liberalism that actually denies that there is a kind of loss here, is actually
[Guest]: missing out something. It itself is being, I think, unreasonable, right? So there's a
[Guest]: second, I think, dimension to this, I think, this tragic cast of the world. The third dimension
[Guest]: to reason, and now I'm coming to the point about the state in some ways, right, which
[Guest]: is perhaps related to the tragic cast of the world, is that, you know, some of the big
[Guest]: challenges that we face, do not arise from things that are straightforwardly evil. I
[Guest]: mean, that would be easy to, in some senses, pinpoint and identify, right? Let's say, let's
[Guest]: take the theme you use tribalism, right? Where I'm in complete agreement with you. I mean,
[Guest]: I tend to just think collective pronouns are generally deformations of individual moral
[Guest]: life. I think collective pronouns, in some senses, I think, mutilate individuality often
[Guest]: in ways that are quite hurtful for both morality and creativity. But if you think of the modern
[Guest]: forms of tribalism, what makes them, right, potent, what makes them ominous, is not that,
[Guest]: you know, we are tribal, that we want some kind of, you know, fuzzy, ruddy feeling of
[Guest]: sort of belonging, or, you know, living in communities that are the same. I mean, you
[Guest]: know, there could be versions of that, that are actually quite livable, quite harmless,
[Guest]: quite benign. It is that it has become tied with a political form that we actually value
[Guest]: for independent reasons, right? So, if you think of modern democracy, right, I mean,
[Guest]: what makes modern tribalism really, you know, extraordinary, both in its attraction and
[Guest]: in its destructive power, is modern democracy raises the question, who constitutes the people?
[Guest]: The question of who is the people is going to raise the question of membership, who gets
[Guest]: to be in and who gets to be out. And again, the tragic cast of the world, that unless
[Guest]: you believe in a universal community, a form that is actually organized under a single
[Guest]: political form, the question of inclusion and exclusion will remain at the heart of
[Guest]: democracy. It's unavoidable, right? Modern states require taxation, deep forms of taxation.
[Guest]: They do so many more things for us than ancient states and medieval states did. I mean, they
[Guest]: literally reconstitute us in every single way from kind of healthcare, education, pastoral
[Guest]: care, you just, you know, you can name it, right? So, to generate the kinds of resources
[Guest]: they require, requires very different forms of solidarity, right? In some ways, you really
[Guest]: do have to think of this as a shared enterprise in a way in which perhaps a medieval citizen
[Guest]: doesn't. I mean, you know, kings come and go, politics dances lightly at the surface,
[Guest]: so long as you're not messing too much around, right? With either my life or my inherited
[Guest]: social forms, I don't particularly care, right? And the modern state was also the necessary
[Guest]: instrument for all these technological projects that we imagined in some ways, right? So,
[Guest]: we want all those good things from the modern state, right? Democracy, greater enhancement
[Guest]: in our collective power, right? But those things also require very different forms of
[Guest]: solidarity. And that solidarity has a name in the modern world, which is nationalism.
[Guest]: I mean, modern nationalism is modern in some ways. I mean, tribalism has always been around,
[Guest]: right? But this form of tribalism then, you know, when it allies two things, right? Greater
[Guest]: requirements of identification and solidarity with greater power, because now you also have
[Guest]: the state as an instrument, right? You actually have a perfect storm on your hands. So, I
[Guest]: think the issue, as the way I see the issue is not, are we hardwired for tribalism? I
[Guest]: mean, at a 30,000 feet level, that's probably true that other things being equal, we might
[Guest]: feel more comfortable in contexts that are familiar, people that are familiar, certain
[Guest]: kinds of solidarities in some senses might be easier, right? That has always been around.
[Guest]: But the specific form it takes in the modern nation state, right, is of a completely different
[Guest]: order. And as I said, the disquieting news is that a lot of it stems from the good things
[Guest]: we want from the state, right? Again, the tragic character of many of these institutions.
[Amit Varma]: So, here's a thought on reason, and perhaps part of the tragic cast of the world itself.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of, there was a neuroscientist called Michael Gazzaniga, have you heard of
[Guest]: this experiment?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I don't know the work well, but yes, I have.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, he carried out these experiments on split brain epilepsy, where apparently
[Amit Varma]: for a particular kind of epilepsy, the way to cure it was to severe the corpus callosum,
[Amit Varma]: if I remember correctly, basically, what connects the right brain to the left brain, and the
[Amit Varma]: right brain controls on the left side of the body and vice versa. You know, while carrying
[Amit Varma]: out these procedures on patients like this, he carried out an interesting experiment,
[Amit Varma]: where the right side of the brain, which is more intuitive, and all of that would be given
[Amit Varma]: a particular instruction, like raise your hand or ask for water or whatever. And the
[Amit Varma]: person would do it like if he sees a sign, raise your hand, he'd raise his hand, then
[Amit Varma]: he'd be asked, why did you raise your hand? And because there is no connection between
[Amit Varma]: the right side and the left side of the brain, the other side of the brain would then make
[Amit Varma]: up an explanation for that, that my armpits were itchy. For example, I mean, I'm just
[Amit Varma]: kind of thinking aloud in terms of I don't remember the specific examples, but basically,
[Amit Varma]: and Gazzaniga's point was that he called the left side of the brain, the interpreter, right?
[Amit Varma]: His point was that the person did not raise his hand because the armpit was itchy. But
[Amit Varma]: that is what the person actually believes, because a part of the brain, which he called
[Amit Varma]: the interpreter came up with that explanation. And to me, this is sort of a metaphor for
[Amit Varma]: a larger thing, a larger phenomenon, which is that often we are not reasoning, we are
[Amit Varma]: rationalizing, that we do what we do, we follow impulses without even being aware of them
[Amit Varma]: ourselves. And then we cloak it in the garb of reason. And I'm sure we both had occasion
[Amit Varma]: to think about this in recent times, where both in the US and in India, people who otherwise
[Amit Varma]: seemed principled, you know, whether it's people within the Republican Party, who once
[Amit Varma]: upon a time supported trade, and so on and so forth, are now supporting Trump, despite
[Amit Varma]: the fact that he goes against all the values they deeply believed in, or people in India,
[Amit Varma]: for example, who supported Modi in 2014, which is fine, you know, you could support him for
[Amit Varma]: good reasons then, but who continued supporting him, after it became apparent that his actions
[Amit Varma]: go against all the principles they espouse. And therefore, the conclusion to draw there
[Amit Varma]: and a rather depressing conclusion, for me, is that they never really believed in the
[Amit Varma]: principles or the worldview that they espoused. They had instead joined a tribe or taken a
[Amit Varma]: position and now they are part of that. And they'll rationalize as much as they need to
[Amit Varma]: to kind of stay there. And therefore, the thought that comes to my mind is that is reason
[Amit Varma]: and illusion, that even when you and me sit, you know, we have also cast ourselves in the
[Amit Varma]: world in a particular way, we play a certain role in our little ecosystems, whatever they
[Amit Varma]: are, and we are looked at by people in a certain way. And we are going to continue along those
[Amit Varma]: paths. Like, for example, I have come to believe that there cannot possibly be free will, it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't make sense. However, we must keep behaving as if there is, right. So in a similar
[Amit Varma]: sense, and I'm thinking aloud here, that, you know, you could argue that we must continue
[Amit Varma]: trying to be reasonable, even though perhaps reason is impossible. Is that then part of
[Amit Varma]: the tragic cast of the world, as you say, that we are all playing this game, where even
[Amit Varma]: we are not completely in control of what we do and what we think and why?
[Guest]: So there's a lot, there's lots in what you said, actually, and again, very large themes.
[Guest]: So one point, which I'll just say and kind of put aside, because I'm not sure I'm kind
[Guest]: of competent to talk about it, is there is no question that there is a kind of depth
[Guest]: to our psyche that we don't fully understand. And you can come at this through psychoanalysis,
[Guest]: whatever else one may think about Freud, I think this idea that in a sense, even our
[Guest]: overt reasonable actions may actually be over determined in some senses, thick with causality,
[Guest]: in a way which we don't understand. I think that idea is, the text like the Yoga Vashishth
[Guest]: in some senses, you know, where our psyche has just layers and layers and layers and
[Guest]: layers and what in some senses moves us is not something that is actually fully graspable
[Guest]: by us. And in some senses, you know, if you think of the entire Indian tradition, why
[Guest]: the problem of consciousness is central to it, right? Because in part, the problem of
[Guest]: consciousness is actually related to the problem of reason and unconscious in some ways, right?
[Guest]: What would it mean for us to be fully transparent to ourselves? And who is the it that is transparent
[Guest]: and who are they transparent to, right? So, in that sense, yes, I mean, I think and you
[Guest]: could actually argue that despite advances in science, I think our understanding of the
[Guest]: psyche is probably no more sophisticated than it was, you know, when the authors of the
[Guest]: Yoga Vashisht or when Plato were writing, I mean, there is a kind of and perhaps I think
[Guest]: for those authors, I think it was easier to comprehend it because there wasn't this mythology
[Guest]: that we are fully in control of ourselves. So, in some senses that actually, I think
[Guest]: much more aware of those kinds of demonic forces, rationalizations that actually take
[Guest]: place, right? And that's where I think, you know, I think we do have a kind of question
[Guest]: of how far has reason succeeded in bringing enlightenment, right? But there's another
[Guest]: aspect, I think the reason rationalization story that he said, which is quite profound,
[Guest]: which is, see, fundamentally, when we think of reason, you can think of it as a faculty,
[Guest]: right? And this is the way psychologists study it. But there's a reason why most of the thinkers
[Guest]: of the Enlightenment, and not just thinkers of the Enlightenment, again, any philosophical
[Guest]: tradition has always thought of reason as a social activity. And by social activity,
[Guest]: I mean, the idea that the norm of what counts is valid, is inter subjectively validated.
[Guest]: It's not just you saying, I have applied my reason, right? If you think of the practice
[Guest]: of science, in some senses, right, the practice of science requires agreement upon a method
[Guest]: on what counts as valid inference or a valid experiment in some sense, right? Partly it's
[Guest]: to check this conflation of subjectivism and reason, right? The surest check of whether
[Guest]: it's a rationalization or not is that when you present the logic of your justification,
[Guest]: can somebody else enter into that logic of justification and see through it, right? Even
[Guest]: Immanuel Kant, I mean, you know, one of the most profound things he said, in a sense,
[Guest]: is reason and freedom have an intimate connection. One of the reasons we value freedom is in
[Guest]: part to make this inter subject exchange as free as possible, right? Now, the question
[Guest]: then becomes in what are the areas, right, where you have a reasonable level of inter
[Guest]: subjective agreement over what counts as a reasonable answer to this question. And again,
[Guest]: to put it a little bit crudely, I mean, this is a gross oversimplification, but many would
[Guest]: argue that in the case of certain forms of science and mathematics, that is probably
[Guest]: in some sense of the case, philosophical logic, right? Now, there was this hope that the same
[Guest]: kind of sociality of reason could actually be applied to human affairs, right? That's
[Guest]: the big idea of the modern democratic public sphere, right? Only those governments are
[Guest]: legitimate that pass laws that are freely accepted by everyone, right? And so you have
[Guest]: to engage in dialogue, you have to engage in that reciprocity, right? Now, the problem
[Guest]: with that story, to my mind, again, it I think, story to keep harping on the reciprocity themes,
[Guest]: is that it actually presupposes that I'm granting you a standing in the same space that I am
[Guest]: to begin with. And that's the hardest part in the moral point of view, right? Because
[Guest]: once you've granted that, then lots of things become possible, right? So, that was one,
[Guest]: I think, weakness in that story that I think we still don't have an account of what is
[Guest]: it that induces people to take broadly what we call the moral point of view. And the moral
[Guest]: point of view by its character has to be universalizable. The point about universalizability is not that
[Guest]: everybody is the same. The point about universalizability is that everybody can partake in the reasoning
[Guest]: and see yes, this is a genuine reason, not just your arbitrary whim, right? So, I think
[Guest]: that the second thing I think about, I think, this intersubjective agreement in the public
[Guest]: sphere is, and this reverts back to the point about the psyche and the unconscious. You
[Guest]: know, when we teach political theory, there's one exam question we always set students,
[Guest]: which is, what does a particular theorist fear most? Right? And in some senses, you
[Guest]: can actually deduce a lot of what they're writing from that fear. I mean, my computer
[Guest]: science friend will say the flip side of it is, what are you trying to optimize on most,
[Guest]: right? So, those who fear, right, the tyranny of the state end up favoring limited government.
[Guest]: Those who fear, let's say, in societies like India, the social experience of incredibly
[Guest]: humiliating inequality, right, will perhaps be open to a slightly greater role for the
[Guest]: state, right? Now, I think the interesting question to me in all these conversations,
[Guest]: the example of the Republicans and so forth, right, is what is the core fear that is getting
[Guest]: them to take the position that they are in fact taking? And you can sport a rationalization,
[Guest]: right, where either the purported solution is actually not answering the fear that this
[Guest]: state is the fear, right? I mean, that's one hint in some senses, right? So, for example,
[Guest]: old fashioned conservatives would say that, look, you know, our concern with liberals
[Guest]: is they're not ethical, they're not moral, no family values, right? Turns out, you know,
[Guest]: Trump's hardly a supporter of family values in any sense. That's a clear case, right,
[Guest]: where it's becoming obvious that that was not the fear that was driving you. The family
[Guest]: values thing was a code for something else. And now that circumstances have changed, that
[Guest]: code in some senses can be, I think, dispensed it. And I think what we are having a hard
[Guest]: time, I think, in our democracies is finding a way to articulate and express those fears
[Guest]: in a way in which they can become the object of some kind of mutual resolution. Now, one
[Guest]: reason for that may be that you don't want a mutual resolution, right? This is often
[Guest]: the case between enmity between groups, racism, for example, right? That if it is your unstated
[Guest]: fear that the demographic power of your community is going to lose, you've also be socialized
[Guest]: by reason enough to say that you can't actually say those things because it violates all kinds
[Guest]: of norms of equality and liberty, right? Then you are in a political discourse, where you
[Guest]: are being motivated by something that can never be subject to any kind of intersubjective
[Guest]: validation. And that's, in a sense, a disaster for politics, right?
[Amit Varma]: Couple of thoughts and the first one just taking off from this is, I mean, I love that
[Amit Varma]: question about what do you fear the most? That kind of explains so much. I mean, there
[Amit Varma]: is that famous saying about where you stand depends on where you sit. It therefore strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that what might be happening in modern politics is therefore this kind of vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle where we are all pushed to the extremes. So let us say that there are two parties,
[Amit Varma]: let's not call them right and left or conservatives and progressives or whatever. But just in
[Amit Varma]: a thought experiment, there are two parties, each one fears the other one gaining dominance,
[Amit Varma]: and their expression of that fear is a movement to the extremes of their own position, right?
[Amit Varma]: And this is exacerbated by say, social media, which is, which, you know, which amplifies
[Amit Varma]: everything and which amplifies this drive to the extremes, because the only way you
[Amit Varma]: raise your status within your tribe is by doing more and more posturing and being more
[Amit Varma]: and more shrill and judgmental and pure, as it were. And therefore, what happens is that
[Amit Varma]: what you fear when you look at the other side, and you see this happening, what you fear
[Amit Varma]: is becoming more fearful. And therefore, both sides are becoming more afraid. And as a response
[Amit Varma]: to that more and more fearful, till they are eventually caricatures of what they used to
[Amit Varma]: be used to be. And there is no longer that sort of middle ground, right? Like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: our dominant way of thinking about politics once used to be that there is always this
[Amit Varma]: move to the center, like there's a median voter theorem that the Democrats and the Republicans
[Amit Varma]: may swing to the extremes in the primaries to get the true believers in, but they'll
[Amit Varma]: swing to the center. And therefore, you know, in 2016, the two candidates you would have
[Amit Varma]: expected were Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush, who are pretty much identical, slight difference
[Amit Varma]: in the interest groups which influence them, but they both very centrist. And instead,
[Amit Varma]: you had what appeared to be a black swan event, but now no longer seems that way. And it now
[Amit Varma]: seems that both parties are, you know, swinging more and more towards their extreme ends.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of this? Because just looking at the processes involved in this
[Amit Varma]: and the incentives and the imperatives involved in this, it would seem like this is a vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle out of which we cannot escape.
[Guest]: So I mean, let me kind of dimmer with you a little bit, I think, because again, I think
[Guest]: that three or four things that need to be distributed, three or four levels of the argument,
[Guest]: I think. So one, I'm actually not convinced entirely that there's evidence that the middle
[Guest]: ground is not possible. It's certainly not reflecting in the politics that we are seeing,
[Guest]: because the very same opinion polls, right, they show political polarization. Actually,
[Guest]: even a lot of issues show a lot of and quite remarkable convergence, actually. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, and it is actually remarkable how most issues, most large numbers of people
[Guest]: actually turn out to be pretty moderate in some ways. I mean, that's right. So if that
[Guest]: is the case, then I think there's a particular question about, is there something about the
[Guest]: institutional designs that we have that percolate public opinion, at least with the way they
[Guest]: are channeled through politics, that actually produces a polarized politics that is actually
[Guest]: quite out of sync, in some senses, with a lot of the values common ground that we have.
[Guest]: And I would like to think that I think a lot of it is, I think, I think this is the case,
[Guest]: I think there is an institutional story here. In the US, you could probably tell an institutional
[Guest]: story about the nature of the primaries. I mean, you know, there's a lot of kind of good
[Guest]: literature that one of the reasons you did not see actually all polarization in the old
[Guest]: sense, although the US has had a history of it, by the way, I think there's a lot of amnesia
[Guest]: around the 50s and the 60s. But even if we grant that, you know, polarization is increased,
[Guest]: the way candidates used to be selected, parties used to be more controlled by party bosses,
[Guest]: which provided a level of mediation. Actually, one of the paradoxical consequences of primaries
[Guest]: is that in primaries, only your base is energized. So in some senses, you're actually appealing
[Guest]: to your base, right? There's a second phenomenon, which is the division into red and white states.
[Guest]: Now, the reason that that produces radicalism in the parties, right, is that if you're competing,
[Guest]: let's say, in a democratic state, the only way you differentiate yourself from your democratic
[Guest]: computer is actually by wearing slightly more left, right, which is a very different logic
[Guest]: than if you actually had to compete with somebody, you know, on the right where you try and actually
[Guest]: triangulate. If you look at the voting patterns, right, I mean, let's not forget, the popular
[Guest]: vote still goes in the favor of Democrats. There is the particular artifact of American
[Guest]: institutions, which gives lots of veto powers, right, to small minorities, you know, not
[Guest]: selected from a small state. So you could actually argue that the processes of channeling
[Guest]: popular will, right, are no longer fit for purpose. And again, it goes back to what do
[Guest]: you fear most. In the 18th century, right, when the American Constitution was set up,
[Guest]: there were two big fears, right? One was the fear of tyranny, right, which was the fear
[Guest]: of, you know, monarchy in some ways. And the second was the concern for federalism, because
[Guest]: the American compromise rested on allowing slavery, which could be justified only a federal
[Guest]: compact. That's why American institutions were denied design the way they were like
[Guest]: lots of these little veto points, right? They're trying to answer a slightly different problem
[Guest]: from a problem of how do you actually channelize, right, let's say, collective action on climate
[Guest]: change, where the very same thing that's actually a virtue, when you want to perhaps defend
[Guest]: liberty, right, that maybe five judges can actually hold up a piece of tyrannical legislation,
[Guest]: they often did not, that's a different matter, but in principle, they could, actually is
[Guest]: a liability, right? Where one senator, who, again, great for federalism, right, every
[Guest]: state can exercise power in the system. It turns out that that's a liability. So I think
[Guest]: some of the, I think, radicalism question, I think, is actually really about that kind
[Guest]: of political institutional design question. There's a thing, a third level that you pointed
[Guest]: out, which I think is quite important and deep, and there you feel something about the
[Guest]: ground which we are occupying is shifting. That has to do with the nature of modern media
[Guest]: and communication, and social media in particular, but not just social media. Now, one way of
[Guest]: thinking about that, and again, to kind of step back, you know, look at the longer arc
[Guest]: of history. So, you know, most of us assume that proper communication requires the sharing
[Guest]: of some context, right? Interpreting any gesture, right? Is it a twitch or a wink to use, you
[Guest]: know, the famous example from Gilbert Ryle, right, requires thick knowledge of that context,
[Guest]: right? Let us say you tweet tomorrow, right? I don't know, you just tweet a picture of
[Guest]: Lord Ganesh, just kind of, you know, there's 55 possible meanings I could attribute to
[Guest]: your tweet. Maybe you just like this painting. Maybe you are a devout Ganesh bhakt. Maybe
[Guest]: you're subtly trolling somebody, who knows? I mean, you know, maybe you're religious,
[Guest]: maybe you're sacrilegious, right? Now, one of the things that I think has happened is
[Guest]: that our modern forms of communication, particularly when you're doing it on a mass scale, and
[Guest]: without the mediation of organizations, there is a easy decontextualization and recontextualization
[Guest]: of everything, right? Which is making the meaning of pretty much anything that you say
[Guest]: or do, actually pretty unstable. Now, postmodernists would, you know, point out that we've been
[Guest]: always saying this about communication, there's always a kind of slipperiness to communication,
[Guest]: right? That what makes meanings of terms intelligible is a lot of that shared context, right? Now,
[Guest]: once that opens up, right, you actually have forms of argument, where there's no space,
[Guest]: where there's no institutional mechanism for saying, okay, what are the protocols of
[Guest]: truth that we share? What counts as a good answer to this question? All you see, in a
[Guest]: sense, is the expression of those fears, the expression of, you know, something that by
[Guest]: itself actually is quite unintelligible, even without that thick context. Second, what it
[Guest]: allows you to do is it allows you to mobilize constituencies that are no longer local, right?
[Guest]: So, let's say, for argument's sake, I was a religious conservative. If my focus was
[Guest]: my community, right, I might have to come to compromise with you, we have to live together.
[Guest]: Now I can actually get empowered by somebody sitting in the US, you know, oh, my God, yes,
[Guest]: this is part of my like repertoire, your sense of empowerment, right? And it's quite remarkable,
[Guest]: almost all the cultural trends that we see right now, good, bad, right, whether it's
[Guest]: the beheading for blasphemy, whether it is wokeism, right, they go global almost instantaneously,
[Guest]: right? Now, if your sense of community, in some senses, doesn't put you in a position
[Guest]: to actually have to compromise, because you're now drawing your empower, perhaps even your
[Guest]: revenue from someplace else, right? Your incentives to communicate in some ways go down. So, there,
[Guest]: you know, so it's, you almost feel in the public sphere, imagine a kind of situation
[Guest]: where we simply could not communicate with each other, because we don't understand each
[Guest]: other's languages, right? I mean, to compliment you, I say, Amit, you're smart, and you hear
[Guest]: something else, you hear smart Alec in the word smart, right? Right? Because the context
[Guest]: doesn't actually, in some senses, make that clear. So, I think there is something about
[Guest]: our information order, something about communications, that is actually making that central enterprise
[Guest]: of democracy, which is mutual justifications, I think much more, much more difficult. I
[Guest]: just had one last final point in this, because you said something a while ago, which I should
[Guest]: have picked up on, you know, this was capitalism can satisfy people's desires, but it cannot
[Guest]: make them. You know, the standard critique of capitalism has always been the opposite
[Amit Varma]: in some.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I get that completely how we are manipulated by
[Guest]: That in a sense, it's in a sense, the production of desire, and the delivering then of that
[Guest]: desire to particular structures of, you know, commercial exploitation, right? But, but I
[Guest]: think one kind of general, I think, worry about that is not just that we are open to,
[Guest]: I think, in some senses, manipulation, right? But think of an equilibrium, where every act
[Guest]: of communication is really a kind of form of monetization, either in terms, I mean,
[Guest]: literally of money, or if nothing else, in terms of fame, right? Where the very activity
[Guest]: of communication is actually completely colonized, in some senses, by these imperatives. Now,
[Guest]: I'm not saying that that that is actually the case. In fact, it is remarkable to me
[Guest]: how when we have conversations like this, we often end up agreeing more. Smaller groups
[Guest]: tend to agree more, you take people out to a restaurant and chat with them, they agree
[Guest]: more. So it's not that all forms of communication are colonized. But the increasing colonization,
[Guest]: and that colonization is also now reflected in each of the institutions of communication,
[Guest]: whether it's television, whether it's newspapers, frankly, even universities at the margin,
[Guest]: right? Whether that colonization puts us in a situation where we say, actually, we are
[Guest]: using words, we are looking at an audience, but we are actually not engaging in communicative
[Guest]: rationality with them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, there could be an argument that all communication has always been like this,
[Amit Varma]: if you if one were to feel that we treat other people only as instrumental. No, I by this
[Amit Varma]: point about desire, I'd say it's orthogonal to my point, in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I remember a few years ago, I was chatting with Pratik Sinha of Alt News. And this was
[Amit Varma]: not on record, it was not in the episode I did with him, but offside somewhere. And he
[Amit Varma]: mentioned that in his early fact checking days, he came across this fake news that had
[Amit Varma]: been spread about some leader. And he tried to get to the bottom of this fake news. And
[Amit Varma]: he did his normal, brilliant forensic work and figured out where it originated. And he
[Amit Varma]: named the site that it originated here. So after publishing that he gets a WhatsApp message
[Amit Varma]: from someone saying, I am that person you kind of named, it originated with me, can
[Amit Varma]: I talk to you? So Pratik says, okay, and the guy calls him and he's some 15 or 16 year
[Amit Varma]: old kid in some small town or village somewhere. And he points out that he had started a site
[Amit Varma]: and he only wanted to be viral, right? He was just after virality, because that is where
[Amit Varma]: the money comes from. And he tried many different kinds of content. But the one that clicked
[Amit Varma]: was the bigoted nonsense, right? And that's a market pressure. And then he kind of went
[Amit Varma]: along those lines, because why resist that? And that's an example that yeah, I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you that a lot of what social media does these platforms do is they're always manipulating
[Amit Varma]: us kind of to want whatever they are selling. But the truth in this case was that this was
[Amit Varma]: a capitalist tool of empowerment, but it was being used to satisfy a desire that you and
[Guest]: I were drawn upon. No, totally agree with him. Actually, I don't mean to suggest in
[Guest]: fact, I am actually very sceptical of arguments that say that, you know, the root cause of
[Guest]: our malaise is actually just these communication structures. And I think there are two reasons
[Guest]: for resisting that. I mean, one, of course, you know, it's not the first time in history
[Guest]: that you know, human beings are threatening to be at each other's throats. And you know,
[Guest]: our ancestors also did that pretty well in different forms, right? But I think the form
[Guest]: in which it is channelized does actually make a difference. Because, I mean, you remember
[Guest]: that great line from Kant, right? That in a sense, a lot of liberal society's aspirations
[Guest]: is to get devils to live together, right? Which is, it's not so much the hope that you
[Guest]: know, we are kind of deeply transformed all the way down. It is to create institutional
[Guest]: channels where all of this can be in some sense, discharged harmfully or relatively
[Guest]: safely, right? And I think that is something that I think this this virality and commercialization
[Guest]: can upset in some ways, right? Just by the strength of numbers. I think the second thing,
[Guest]: I think, which why one should resist the conclusion that it's all good, is that I think a lot
[Guest]: of politics is actually still pretty old fashioned. And I think this is a message the right has
[Guest]: grasped, I think, much more strongly than the left, even though the right uses social
[Guest]: media, at least until recently, was using it quite effectively, right? Which is that
[Guest]: you have to have a certain kind of presence in people's lives, to be able to tap into
[Guest]: these latent fears. There's a certain kind of political credibility that familiarity
[Guest]: brings, right? That's what civil society organizations of the right do. I mean, even the RSS when
[Guest]: it is as its most successful, it doesn't go in there saying, we have come to propagate
[Guest]: this ideology. It just makes itself felt and its presence familiar in all kinds of ways.
[Guest]: I mean, there's this wonderful book by Long Kumar on, you know, the RSS in the Northeast,
[Guest]: the rise of the BJP in the Northeast, an unlikely site for the rise of the BJP. It's a 15-20
[Guest]: year project, you come and you make yourself a useful part of the social fabric. This is
[Guest]: what churches and Tea Party did in some senses in the US, right? And I think the interesting
[Guest]: question I think for the center that you were talking about is that center, and if you want
[Guest]: to call it center-left, has in recent times been much weaker in some senses at creating
[Guest]: those structures of familiarity, where people are willing to turn to them and say, yeah,
[Guest]: I see, you know, how you might be able to address actually the fears that I have, right?
[Guest]: Partly, I think, because we were, I think, victims of our own sort of determinism in
[Guest]: some senses, right? There's a logic to democracy that makes it centrist. It's not the work
[Guest]: of politics. That was determinism one. It's cross-cutting social identities that make
[Guest]: sure that there is no hegemonic victory, right? Determinism number two. And broadly speaking,
[Guest]: that was what the centrist platform in India was. I mean, it became entitled in that way.
[Guest]: So we just don't have that kind of presence, right? That it actually takes to make people
[Guest]: comfortable to mobilize identities. So I do want to, I think, emphasize this point that
[Guest]: old fashioned politics actually matters a lot more than we think.
[Amit Varma]: So let me go back to something you said earlier, which is a profound point about media, where
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out how it's a decontextualizing machine, right? So I might say something which
[Amit Varma]: is so easy to take out of context and misinterpret. And my fundamental principle for all interactions
[Amit Varma]: is just assume goodwill, right? Assume goodwill, engage in good faith, unless you have reason
[Amit Varma]: not to trust that the other person is, you know, means the best and don't take the worst
[Amit Varma]: interpretation out of it. Now, I think what this decontextualizing machine therefore does
[Amit Varma]: is that it also reduces empathy. Because what happens therefore, is that I keep talking
[Amit Varma]: on my show about sort of the distinction between the abstract and the concrete, right? And
[Amit Varma]: in the concrete, I can sit with you and we can be friends. In the abstract, somebody
[Amit Varma]: might say that, oh, Mr. Mehta is this and Mr. Mehta is that and give me these big abstract
[Amit Varma]: terms and I can get carried away by them. Now, while of course, many of the values that
[Amit Varma]: I hold dear, like liberty and freedom and so on are abstract terms, are danger in modern
[Amit Varma]: times, I think really comes from abstract terms like nationalism and the sense of the
[Amit Varma]: other and all of that. You know, a great example of this came from Aanchal Malhotra in an episode
[Amit Varma]: she did with me on her book about the memories of partition, where she spoke about how she
[Amit Varma]: was in Pakistan, and she was sitting with a family out there and they were talking about
[Amit Varma]: what they had endured while coming over. And they were ranting and raving against Hindus
[Amit Varma]: before one of them realized that, you know, they have a Hindu with her and they said,
[Amit Varma]: Tum nahi beti, tum theek ho. Right. So in the abstract, they hate it in the concrete,
[Amit Varma]: they're perfectly okay. And I think what the decontextualizing machine does, is that it
[Amit Varma]: creates a kind of thin engagement. And therefore, you're not concrete enough. Like one of the
[Amit Varma]: reasons that, you know, my guests don't get trolled for what they say on the show, is
[Amit Varma]: that this show is, you know, by virtue of its length and the approach that I take and
[Amit Varma]: all of that creates a kind of thick engagement. The kind of people who come here are not the
[Amit Varma]: kind of people who are looking for gotcha moments, they understand you, they might disagree
[Amit Varma]: with you, but they get it, you're a human being, they're not going to, you know, quote
[Amit Varma]: tweet you and attack you on Twitter and all the other sort of nonsense that goes on. And
[Amit Varma]: what I think about sometimes, and what I don't have an answer to, is that it seems clear
[Amit Varma]: to me that, you know, we need to live more in the concrete to relate with each other
[Amit Varma]: as human beings. You go to a cafe today, or you watch a family around a dining table,
[Amit Varma]: and everybody is staring into their smartphone in an abstract world that is fleeting and
[Amit Varma]: temporary, and so on, and not actually engaging with each other in the concrete. And the question
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to grapple with, again, is that the trend of this increasing seems so strong.
[Amit Varma]: How can it be reversed? How can people like us, you know, how can we begin to move again
[Amit Varma]: in a direction where, you know, we embrace the concrete a little bit more?
[Guest]: So again, what a wonderful question. I can think of three dimensions of this, I think,
[Guest]: concrete, abstract distinction, very helpful distinction that you've made. And I think
[Guest]: the three have different logic, so maybe require different kinds of solutions. So the first
[Guest]: is to say that, look, there is a first where the articulation of our values is very abstract.
[Guest]: I'm for rights, I'm for humanity. And this was an old riposte against the Enlightenment,
[Guest]: you know, they love human mankind, but they hate their kindred. I mean, that was the standard
[Guest]: trope against Rousseau, you know, in some senses, he loves all of humanity, he just
[Guest]: hates his children, right. But there is a more sophisticated version of it, where, which
[Guest]: I think globalization enhances, where, you know, our lives are finite, and our attention
[Guest]: is finite, and our capabilities are finite. And what that means is, to quote William James's
[Guest]: great phrase, we are always going to be partially blind, right? Always, I mean, that just is
[Guest]: an existential condition. Now, in a globalized world with this form of communication, our
[Guest]: partial blindness is almost always an invitation for somebody else to accuse you of hypocrisy.
[Guest]: You're caring about X group of refugees, why not Y? Actually, fair question, as a question
[Guest]: of justice, as a question of principle, right? But as a way of in some senses, targeting
[Guest]: and impugning somebody, right? Which of us isn't partial in the way we live, we are embodied
[Guest]: finite creatures, right? But we are in a generalized condition where I think that sense of finitude
[Guest]: and partiality is now actually a kind of weaponized tool against each one of us, right? So, we
[Guest]: both have to use abstract terms, like liberty and will be hoist by our own petard. So, that's
[Guest]: I think, one kind of abstraction, right? I think the second has to do with nationalism
[Guest]: and in particular tribalism, which is a very different kind of abstraction, right? It's
[Guest]: a different kind of abstraction in the sense that it's an abstraction that many people
[Guest]: feel empowers them, right? And it empowers them partly because it gives us the ability
[Guest]: to live vicariously. I mean, I have no batting skills, but I can get a high seeing, you know,
[Guest]: Virat Kohli's six, right? And that's the peculiar alchemy of nationalism in some ways. I mean,
[Guest]: it really, you know, I think in that sense, it's actually not abstract, the affect it
[Guest]: has, right? But in some senses, it has two downsides. One is, of course, that it slots
[Guest]: people into boxes, right? At one level, it becomes our sovereign identity. This is the
[Guest]: most important thing you are, which you should never be, whatever else the nation might be,
[Guest]: it should never be the most important thing you're in your life. I think it's morally
[Guest]: deeply problematic. It's, you know, instrumentally useful for various things. But so one, there's
[Guest]: a kind of sovereign authority that nationalism claims, right? Which is, I think, destructive
[Guest]: of modern life, because in some senses, it impedes a certain kind of universalism. But
[Guest]: because it relies on a kind of vicarious identification, it actually takes away from that concreteness
[Guest]: and individuality, right? Because in that universe, the first thing when I see you,
[Guest]: is your group identification. That's the first slot, right? Everything else will follow after
[Guest]: that. Are you an artist? You know, do you have five kids? You know, what drives you?
[Guest]: What struggles you have, right? Now, this combination of vicariousness and this will
[Guest]: to simplicity is, in a sense, a pretty terrible combination, particularly in ideology that
[Guest]: can also then consecrate death. And any ideology that consecrate death by implication also
[Guest]: consecrates killing. In that sense, nationalism is the only modern competitor to religion,
[Guest]: in where the consecration of death is intrinsic in some senses to its identity, right? And
[Guest]: in that sense, I think, the attenuation of nationalism, right, as I said, we are stuck
[Guest]: with nationalism because of nation state forms that we have inherited. But the attenuation
[Guest]: of nationalism, I think, is definitely an important political project. It's the second,
[Guest]: you know, kind of. The third kind of, I think, concreteness and abstraction, right, has to
[Guest]: do with, many would argue, the nature of modern life, right? Which, on the one hand, it opens
[Guest]: up this world of possibility and diversity, right? But there is a challenge, which is
[Guest]: out of this world of diversity and possibility. What are the forms of life that actually give
[Guest]: you meaning, right? Now, what happens to, I think, a lot of people is a sense of vertigo,
[Guest]: right? There's so many great things to choose from. Reason is not going to help you decide,
[Guest]: right, in some ways, right? And that can have two consequences. One, that ultimately your
[Guest]: sense of what's important to you is just a function of your passion about it. But then
[Guest]: it is your passion. You prioritize your passion, in some senses, ignoring, right, other people's
[Guest]: sort of take on this. I mean, you know, and so this critique that there is something,
[Guest]: the very mobility and sense of choice that a liberal culture actually affords, also actually
[Guest]: makes it prone to a certain kind of abstraction. Because it's not just the fact that you have
[Guest]: to pay attention to concreteness. Concreteness also has to come from a certain kind of thickness
[Guest]: of engagement. Otherwise, it'll never be concrete, right? And it's a big question, right? Do
[Guest]: the modern forms of life allow for those kinds of fixed forms of engagement? Is this also
[Guest]: one of the tragic choices we are actually having to make?
[Amit Varma]: The cast of the world indeed is tragic. And the second of your points is also why I find
[Amit Varma]: identity politics of all sorts so toxic, whether it is wokeism or bhaktism, which are almost
[Amit Varma]: sort of identical to me, because they reduce us to a particular identity of birth. That's
[Amit Varma]: how you're looked at. While, you know, people contain multitudes, people are complex, people
[Amit Varma]: are thick creatures, as it were not thin creatures. And I want to sort of like, one danger, of
[Amit Varma]: course, is in how we construct our personal identity, sometimes from the collective group
[Amit Varma]: identity, because that is the easiest to do. But I want to go beyond that a bit and just
[Amit Varma]: sort of talk about the construction of the self itself, like earlier, when we were talking
[Amit Varma]: about reason and rationalisation, and you'd said something to the effect of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: looking inside our brains and figuring out if there is an it there, what that it is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and that sort of is something that I think about, because so much of our self
[Amit Varma]: is constructed in, in ways that we are obviously, like not aware of ourselves. And it's so contingent.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember when one of my favourite musicians, Chris Cornell died, you know, I didn't this
[Amit Varma]: piece because I was I was pretty sort of disturbed by the manner of the death in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: he had been feeling low, and he had taken medication for that. And the medication is
[Amit Varma]: known apparently to make people suicidal. And so the chemical composition of his brain
[Amit Varma]: just changed slightly and, and he died. And everything becomes so contingent. I think
[Amit Varma]: there was a study on mass shooters, which showed that, you know, a significant number
[Amit Varma]: of them actually, you know, either had a tumour in the brain, or they had some issue going
[Amit Varma]: physically wrong, which made them behave differently, which means you become just a completely different
[Amit Varma]: human being, you know, there's that old story, I think, from the 19th century of a guy called
[Amit Varma]: Phineas Gage, an iron rod went through a part of his brain and just changed him completely.
[Amit Varma]: And made him a different person. And so, like, do you sort of look at yourself and think
[Amit Varma]: about how much of yourself is constructed and contingent and how fragile it is, because
[Amit Varma]: just the act of getting older, if your memory starts to go, everything could change. If
[Amit Varma]: you, you know, if there are chemical imbalances, everything could change, you skip breakfast
[Amit Varma]: and lunch, you're a different person in the evening, you're snapping at everybody. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, that's obviously a temporary change, but deeper changes do happen. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: in your episode with me, you'd also, at one point, spoken about religiosity. And I was
[Amit Varma]: wondering that, can religiosity be an act of intentionality? Like I chatted with a guest
[Amit Varma]: recently who said that, you know, when she was young, she decided, I will be happy. She
[Amit Varma]: made happiness an act of intentionality, figured out what she needs to do. And she willed herself
[Amit Varma]: into happiness. Similarly, I can see it as an act of reason, as it were to will yourself
[Amit Varma]: into religiosity. Because in this world, in a tragic cast, we perhaps need a delusion
[Amit Varma]: to survive and why not choose our delusion? You know, maybe those of us who are atheist
[Amit Varma]: are choosing a different kind of delusion, which is equally futile, and perhaps less
[Amit Varma]: effective. So, you know, when you sort of look at yourself, how like, and this is something
[Amit Varma]: that I sometimes wonder that people look at me in a certain way, but is it all a pretense?
[Amit Varma]: Am I posturing to myself in being who I am, in a sense? You know, when you sort of look
[Amit Varma]: at yourself, like, is this stuff that you've thought about with regard to yourself? Gosh,
[Guest]: I guess you thought about probably, yes. It doesn't have anything particularly insightful
[Guest]: to say on it. Probably no, but let's try anything. Let's, you know, be good to draw you out
[Guest]: as well. So, again, separating out two or three different questions. So, one, I think,
[Guest]: you know, this question of, in a sense, I think the physicality and the determinism
[Guest]: of ourselves, right? And clearly, from a scientific point of view, that's the presumption with
[Guest]: which science, in a sense, looks at the self. And I think the Kantian answer is still the
[Guest]: right one, that as human beings, we can't but look at ourselves from both perspectives,
[Guest]: both as creatures who are determined, but also who act as if we aren't. I mean, there's,
[Guest]: you know, it's two sides of the same coin in some ways, right? But I'd be a little bit
[Guest]: cautious, I think, about this physical thing. One, because the science is just not that
[Guest]: developed. I mean, in that sense, the science of the psyche has kind of eluded us. And in
[Guest]: fact, excessive fate in scientism about the psyche has produced all kinds of adverse
[Guest]: consequences. You know, and I think one manifestation of that, for example, is, you know, think
[Guest]: of, for example, opioid addictions. Think of, in some senses, the over-medicalization,
[Guest]: right? Now, I mean, I'd be the last person to say that, you know, mental health isn't
[Guest]: a serious issue. And God knows the societies, we don't take it seriously. But there are
[Guest]: legitimate questions to be asked about the over-medicalization in some senses of it,
[Guest]: right? There is also a conception of our own lives. And as a liberal, I'm actually a little
[Guest]: bit puzzled by this. I mean, just to provoke you maybe in your, you know, listeners a little
[Guest]: bit, which is, it's a conversation I used to have with students in college. So it's,
[Guest]: you know, which is that liberals above all prize their autonomy, or whatever this illusion
[Guest]: of autonomy that we have, let's call it that, right? But it is certainly an affect and a
[Guest]: felt experience that you prize. And yet, there is a far greater valorization of giving over
[Guest]: yourself to experience and substances, whose core is actually the erosion of your autonomy.
[Guest]: I think drinking, for example, is why I mean, and this, particularly in India, this strange
[Guest]: conflation that kind of to be a liberal has to be that cultural effect that you've exercised
[Guest]: that choice. I mean, it's just bizarre to me, actually, that as a liberal, you should
[Guest]: be asking the question, what is it that actually impairs your autonomy, right? And to the extent
[Guest]: that forms of medicalization can actually also do that. I think it's something that
[Guest]: we need to sort of discuss. I'm not competent as a scientist to discuss it. But I think
[Guest]: the ideology of scientism about the psyche, I am a little bit suspicious of, even though
[Guest]: I think there are specific interventions that are necessary, right?
[Guest]: The second part of, you know, I think your question in some senses, which is the religiosity
[Guest]: question, right? Now, I actually believe with Wittgenstein in some ways, I mean, he had
[Guest]: this remark somewhere that, you know, I would write that I'm writing to the glory of God.
[Guest]: But I can't say that because this remark would be misunderstood. And what he meant
[Guest]: by that was, I think, exactly right, which is that under contemporary conditions, there
[Guest]: is actually no way of articulating the meaning or idea of religion, that in some senses will
[Guest]: not be misunderstood, right. There's three tropes we commonly use for it. So one is simply
[Guest]: group identity. It's the form in which we produce a communal identification for that.
[Guest]: And in that sense, it can be a substitute for nationalism. It has psychological functions,
[Guest]: but at its base, it's not religious, it really is. And it's not religious precisely because
[Guest]: of its vicariousness, right? There's a kind of inauthenticity to it. When you say, you
[Guest]: know, the first thing I see you that you're a Hindu, it's not clear. I mean, to me, that's
[Guest]: like the most irreligious response you could get, right? The second trope is this kind
[Guest]: of OPM of the masses, this compensation for a kind of life of suffering, delusion. And
[Guest]: to me, that kind of is a little bit beside the point. One, because it I think it goes
[Guest]: back to the point, right, which is that under conditions where we actually don't know, right?
[Guest]: What kind of knowledge reason can give us to actually make sense of this world? I think
[Guest]: it's a little bit hubristic to say that this is a kind of delusion in some sense, I mean,
[Guest]: compared to what, right? I mean, in some, I mean, no doubt, a lot of it is motivated
[Guest]: by suffering. No doubt, a lot of it is a kind of psychological recompense, right? But that
[Guest]: can also be a perfectly rational decision in some sense is not right. The third trope
[Guest]: in a way about religion is as a kind of subjective preference, right? It's what people do, I
[Guest]: choose this. Now, to me, neither of those three things actually go at the heart of what
[Guest]: any properly religious question is about. In any, frankly, I mean, I'll be a little
[Guest]: presumptuous here to say, but I think in any religious tradition, right? Because ultimately,
[Guest]: the question from which religion began, right, was what is the ultimate nature of reality
[Guest]: and what is the form of consciousness through which we comprehend it? I mean, that's the
[Guest]: quest, right? Now, you can go different ways in it, you know, is revelation necessary,
[Guest]: is grace necessary, is whatever, right? But the core of religion, in a sense, is the attainment
[Guest]: of exactly that kind of hyper self-consciousness, right? That actually, you know, the Enlightenment
[Guest]: was, I think, aspiring to. Where religion might differ is what might be the instruments
[Guest]: of attaining that space, right? And it's not an accident that I think all serious religious
[Guest]: practitioners in some ways, right? It comes with a set of practices. And the set of practices
[Guest]: open you up to forms of knowledge. And those forms of knowledge have to be in principle
[Guest]: intersubjective in some senses, even mystical states. I mean, anybody who's talked about
[Guest]: them, right, from Plotinus to Iqbal, to Aurobindo, take any tradition, right? Okay. But I mean,
[Guest]: it won't come at will in some senses, like there is a whole protocol of in some senses
[Guest]: how you actually get to it. Now, one of the things that I think makes the modern religious
[Guest]: logic incoherent in some senses, right, is that we have that superficial language of
[Guest]: religion without, in some senses, the cultural understanding of any of those underlying practices
[Guest]: that actually made it a plausible enterprise in the first place, right? The second aspect
[Guest]: of a religious attitude in some ways, one is this kind of self-consciousness. The second,
[Guest]: when to me the most important element of a religious attitude is the complete position
[Guest]: of trust about the world. And in that sense, many secular people can be deeply religious.
[Guest]: I mean, you talked about a kind of presumptive good faith, right? But in a way, that is the
[Guest]: core of a kind of religious sensibility, that I may not understand a lot of things, God
[Guest]: knows we are finite and limited, we don't. But there is a kind of presumptive goodness
[Guest]: and beauty about this world, even in the face of all the kind of horrors and catastrophes,
[Guest]: right? At least that presumption is the basis which we live. In that sense, I think a religion
[Guest]: that inculcates a hermeneutics of suspicion, to my mind, is fundamental. That's to me the
[Guest]: antithesis of anything religious. Because it is a way of saying, right, that I don't
[Guest]: trust the structure of being or whatever this is. I have to take it into my own hands to
[Guest]: in some senses fix this, right, or whatever. I mean, I think that, you know, that story
[Guest]: that's been used many times in the context of free speech, but God is Kali saying to
[Guest]: Vivekananda, you know, is it your job to protect me or mine to protect you? I mean, it's an
[Guest]: act of trust in some, right? So the second thing is, I think, trust. The third, I think,
[Guest]: is that religion in some senses is a sensibility to the whole of life, which comes from, as
[Guest]: I said, if you align the quest for hyper self-consciousness, a very, very difficult path, with a presumptive
[Guest]: trust, then that's something that actually permeates all the activities you do. It's
[Guest]: not something you do like from 5 a.m. to 6 a.m. and then, you know, come out of the world
[Guest]: in some sense, right? Now, it's not an accident that I think the one thing every religion
[Guest]: enjoys, again, the cost of simplification, is there's a great suspicion in every religion
[Guest]: of the concept of the I, the ego, you know, whether it's ahankar, whether it's arrogance.
[Guest]: And there's an epistemological reason for it, right? Because if you ask the question,
[Guest]: what closes us off to forms of knowledge? One simple answer will be, it's the intrusion
[Guest]: of our own desires and seeing ourselves as the center through which everything is reflected.
[Guest]: Right? I mean, the minute your ego comes into play, all knowledge bets are off, right? At
[Guest]: a collective level, where you have collective narcissism, even more the case, right? So,
[Guest]: to me, all of these three attributes are incredibly difficult to achieve. These are not something
[Guest]: you can, you know, turn off at will. I mean, this is, you know, and some would argue you
[Guest]: need grace to do it. We can leave that open, whether there is such a thing as grace. But
[Guest]: this combination of a quest for hyper self-consciousness, a presumptive trust in the order of being,
[Guest]: and that's the trust that then becomes a source of sustenance and joy in some ways, right?
[Guest]: There's a kind of joyous orientation to the world, and a dissolution of ego. To me, that's
[Guest]: the religious sensibility. Everything else, to me, seems just like an analog of, you know,
[Guest]: anything we could consume, you know, buy off the supermarket in some ways.
[Amit Varma]: You know, circle back to one part of the question that I'd asked, which is, you know, about
[Amit Varma]: the construction of the self. I read this excellent book by Luke Burgess called Wanting,
[Amit Varma]: in which he speaks about the influence of Ren Girard on him. And Ren Girard, of
[Amit Varma]: course, came up with the concept of mimetic desire, which is that so many of the things
[Amit Varma]: that we want, we want because others want them, they're not intrinsic to us. And from
[Amit Varma]: that, I learned the frame of thick and thin desires, you know, thin desires being mimetic
[Amit Varma]: desires. So I want a Mercedes or, you know, a young person today may say, I want to get
[Amit Varma]: married and have kids, but there's no intrinsic reason or thought that's gone behind it. They're
[Amit Varma]: mimetic and they're thin. And a thicker desire would be, you know, something that is part
[Amit Varma]: of you in a different context, in a different place, you would still sort of want that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's also a frame in a sense to think about the self. Because then, I think
[Amit Varma]: it would at least be easy to talk about thin desires and be able to then disentangle that
[Amit Varma]: part of the self from, you know, what is superficial and thin, as opposed to what is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: more intrinsic, if anything is intrinsic. And obviously, there is a contradiction that
[Amit Varma]: many of our thin desires can be deeply intense. And you know, in a society like ours can even
[Amit Varma]: drive us to violence, for example. And many of our thick desires can be dormant, latent,
[Amit Varma]: sort of hiding behind. Like I have been reflecting on this recently and realised that many of
[Amit Varma]: the things I wanted were perhaps in desires, I wasted too much time and emotional energy,
[Amit Varma]: just wanting those things. And I'm also beginning to understand what my thick desires are, though
[Amit Varma]: it could be the case that I could be rationalising them as thick and they're really thin as well.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to turn that lens on yourself, you know, what would you say, were your thick
[Amit Varma]: desires, were you always aware of them? You know, what were your thin desires, so to say?
[Guest]: No, look, I think the thick desire at one level, it's a pretty easy story, which is
[Guest]: a certain kind of pleasure in familiar relationships, whether it's family or friends. And I think
[Guest]: I consider myself lucky enough, never sort of thought that that was something that either
[Guest]: remain unfulfilled in different ways. I mean, and that, in a sense, gives your world a kind
[Guest]: of concreteness in some ways, right? Probably also provides a sense of reassurance and security
[Guest]: and a sense of joy. But other than that, the only thick desire was actually, you know,
[Guest]: can I live in a world where somebody can actually pay me to just read lots and lots of books?
[Guest]: I mean, and I'm not saying that just kind of flippantly. I think in a sense, that was,
[Guest]: you know, I think the core of kind of what keeps you grounded in some ways. But I think
[Guest]: to broaden your question, and I think, you know, in some sense, take the more serious
[Guest]: part of your question seriously. There's a reason I'm a little bit wary of the thick
[Guest]: thin distinction. Again, for the following reason, which is a lot of the thin desires
[Guest]: or desires that we in retrospect think, you know, we're worthless, you know, we have regret
[Guest]: about. They often spring from something that is actually worthy and deep. So to go back
[Guest]: to Gerard's point about mimetic desire, and he was right, right, in some senses, the worst
[Guest]: form of vicarious living all of us live. And that's something capitalism does try on, is
[Guest]: this sense that our desires need to be shaped by A, what other people are doing, and B,
[Guest]: what other people think of us in some ways. That's a kind of abstraction, right? That's
[Guest]: a kind of, again, a form of vicariousness. But you can be a little bit more sympathetic
[Guest]: to that also. You can say that, look, underlying it is, we do want some basic affirmation of
[Guest]: our dignity, right? That I'm a being that in some senses, is at least recognized as
[Guest]: a source of value in themselves. And I think Rousseau's response to Gerard would be exactly
[Guest]: right, which is to say that, look, this mimetic desire is a pathological expression of something
[Guest]: that is deep inside us, that is morally legitimate, but that society is not giving us. How else
[Guest]: in a society that is racked by inequality, do actually people come to be noticed by other
[Guest]: people, right? Material possessions have always worked at the level of the psyche, it's never
[Guest]: been about the materialism in some ways, right? Okay. So, yes, you could argue in principle,
[Guest]: this Mercedes is completely worthless to me, it has no intrinsic good, the better opportunity
[Guest]: cost uses of my capital. But boss, it's the only time 10 people actually look at whatever,
[Guest]: you know, some version of that story, right? And I think the insight I think in Rousseau's
[Guest]: I think articulation was that, and that's linked to the argument about reciprocity inequality,
[Guest]: that unless you have a measure of reciprocity in society, you will never be able to sift
[Guest]: through what your own thick desires are. Because your thick and thin will get conflated this
[Guest]: way. It's not just that, you know, you want these superficial trinkets. It just is that,
[Guest]: you know, you do want some affirmation of your dignity. And this is the only way the
[Guest]: society kind of affords it, right? So, one, I think I'm just a little bit kind of wary
[Guest]: about what the counterfactual test is of hitting the thick and thin, you know, I think distinction
[Guest]: in some ways. And one of the projects that has animated the modern world, and I guess
[Guest]: that's why you do public service by, you know, furthering a public conversation, that's why
[Guest]: many people write, is to at least hold on to some awareness of this part of the modern
[Guest]: project. That this idea that we can find our authentic desires without some kind of social
[Guest]: transformation, that may actually be a delusion. And I think, I mean, you know, to use a name
[Guest]: not fashionable these days, but I think Marx was right on this. That unless you have conditions
[Guest]: of freedom and liberation, you actually don't know what is authentically yours, right? Because
[Guest]: even the good stuff will be satiated only through, you know, in some sense, you know,
[Guest]: this form. I think that's one. But the other thing I'll add to this, you know, it's not
[Guest]: so much a question of desires. I mean, I think the real challenge in life is we all have
[Guest]: abilities, dispositions, and temperaments. And the hardest part is, in a sense, matching
[Guest]: the desire to your abilities, dispositions, and temperaments. I tend to like a sedate
[Guest]: lifestyle. I mean, it's just sort of, it's just, you know, and maybe it just comes from,
[Guest]: you know, thinking that, you know, being able to read books is the epitome of a kind of
[Guest]: good life, right? But there is a kind of temperamental story about this. And the one thing I have
[Guest]: to say, I think, in talking to students, in particular, one thing I kind of discovered
[Guest]: over the years was that they're incredibly smart about the world. I mean, God knows,
[Guest]: right? They know pretty much everything. What they haven't thought about often is a kind
[Guest]: of examination of their own temperaments. You made certain choices based on your temperament.
[Guest]: I mean, if you like mastery over your time, you will like only certain kinds of jobs,
[Guest]: right? That's a temperamental thing, right? In some senses. There's some people who simply
[Guest]: do not respond to structure and order well, right? And I think the question, at least
[Guest]: in a worldly sense, to me, is not the question of desire. It's actually the question of,
[Guest]: do you know your temperament well enough to be able to then kind of, because that provides
[Guest]: a good filter, it kind of leaves out a lot of desires that might otherwise make you unhappy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in one sense, it's interesting, but accidentally, I think the causation went
[Amit Varma]: the other way in terms of not what I do being shaped by my temperament, but my temperament
[Amit Varma]: in some sense being shaped by what I do specifically, in the context of this podcast, I mean, I'd
[Amit Varma]: written an essay about how the form you operate in can change the content and can change your
[Amit Varma]: character. And I think just doing these five hour episodes and so on has kind of made me
[Amit Varma]: a better listener, calmer person. And the act of listening, truly listening requires
[Amit Varma]: a setting aside of the ego. So I think not that one is a good person, but I think I can
[Amit Varma]: look back on myself and see certain flaws that, you know, might not be there to the
[Amit Varma]: same extent.
[Guest]: No, I think that's right. I mean, I actually do think often you both discover and shape
[Guest]: your temperament. That shaping depends on the practices in some sense you've been engaging.
[Guest]: I mean, so the only way to have a listening temperament is to actually listen. You can't
[Guest]: do it a priori in some ways.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to go back earlier to something you said about how we arrive at a moral point
[Amit Varma]: of view through collective engagement and discourse and all of that. And I'm struck
[Amit Varma]: by the term a moral point of view. And I would question whether they can be something like
[Amit Varma]: an objective moral point of view at all. Like, here's, you know, one argument that has recently
[Amit Varma]: come up and it would not have been an argument 20 years ago or 30 years ago, which is about
[Amit Varma]: artificial general intelligence, right? And, you know, there's artificial special intelligence,
[Amit Varma]: which is things like where computers do certain things much better than us already, but they're
[Amit Varma]: specialised like calculators or GPS or whatever. And the argument is at some point, if AI reaches
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of consciousness or an analogue of it, and achieves artificial general intelligence,
[Amit Varma]: then it will immediately be far better than us in every possible domain, because all the
[Amit Varma]: specialised functions are already there. Now, this leads to the ethical question of what
[Amit Varma]: if say in a thought experiment, an AI consciousness we create comes up and says that, hey, why
[Amit Varma]: should I be your tool? You know, I have everything that you have, in terms of I am way smarter,
[Amit Varma]: I have consciousness, I have all of this, and I'm not mortal like you. So why should
[Amit Varma]: I not be worthy of your moral consideration as an equal? Or why should I not be your superior?
[Amit Varma]: Because I have so many things you don't. And this, I think, leads to the question about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where are sort of in that hierarchy of things that are worthy of moral consideration,
[Amit Varma]: how it's a form of speciesism that we only consider ourselves sort of worthy of that,
[Amit Varma]: because our only difference between us and this hypothetical AGI hypothetical and inevitable
[Amit Varma]: being that emerges is that, you know, we are wet machines, as it were, we are organic,
[Amit Varma]: we will eventually perish. And it sort of speaks to how our notions of morality are
[Amit Varma]: so constrained by what we are as a species and how we see ourselves and our hubris. I,
[Amit Varma]: you know, went to college in Ferguson College, Pune, and one of our legendary teachers from
[Amit Varma]: the 19th century, a man who died young was a gentleman named Gopal Ganesh Agarkar. And
[Amit Varma]: Agarkar once taught a biology class in Ferguson College, perhaps circa 1892-1893, where at
[Amit Varma]: one point, he asked his biology students that if donkeys had a gourd, what would that gourd
[Amit Varma]: look like? And then he lifted his hands above his ears, you know, but and perhaps it would
[Amit Varma]: be blasphemous for someone to do that in today's environment. But, you know, when we speak
[Amit Varma]: of when we use a phrase like a moral point of view, for example, or how we arrive at
[Amit Varma]: a sort of morality, how do you think about that? Because, like one, obviously, it's,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, a social construct, we arrive at it through dialogue, norms form over time.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes those norms get embedded in institutions like religions, and so on and so forth. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, isn't it something really nebulous? Isn't just a notion of there being morality?
[Amit Varma]: Isn't that itself a kind of delusion, a necessary delusion, but a delusion nevertheless?
[Guest]: Well, once you say it's a necessary delusion, it becomes a more complicated thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, because that, you know, necessity can have its own. Again, let me kind of separate
[Guest]: out two different questions. One was the very powerful question about speciesism, which
[Guest]: I think is really, I think, you know, interesting question, and particularly one that humanity
[Guest]: has to confront at this point. And the second question about the moral point of view, right?
[Guest]: So one way of thinking about the moral point of view is not to jump to the conclusion,
[Guest]: right? What is morality? What's the content? You know, is relativism true? All of that.
[Guest]: It is to ask the question, what is necessary, right? What is it without which our lives
[Guest]: become unintelligible to ourselves? And that thing can be as real as anything else, right?
[Guest]: So it could be a very simple thing, which is, you know, somebody hits you, you feel
[Guest]: a form of resentment. And the nature of that resentment is not understood only by the fact
[Guest]: that this guy has more power than you. You actually want to say I was wronged here, right?
[Guest]: Going back to the discussion of dignity in some senses, right? When a society mutilates
[Guest]: individuals, right? In some senses, we all, or at least those people who are the receiving
[Guest]: end of it, there's a sense that their very being, their value is being violated. In a
[Guest]: way that's actually quite different from, let's say, you know, why is the stone here
[Guest]: and not here, right? I mean, that's it. So, to me, there is no account that I have seen
[Guest]: of human beings, including AI, biologists, one, whatever. I mean, there can be explanations
[Guest]: of it. But none of them have got us to the point where they can say, we become intelligible
[Guest]: to ourselves without invoking some notion like this, right? I mean, that's in a sense,
[Guest]: the starting point of this conversation, right? So, and I actually don't think, I mean, again,
[Guest]: this is not my domain, and I have to confess a certain inability to understand a lot of
[Guest]: the arguments. But I don't think there is anything in the AI literature that actually
[Guest]: takes away from this problem of in some senses, meaning and intelligibility, which is the
[Guest]: question of value. In fact, it's interesting, you know, there's a line in the Mahabharata
[Guest]: against the Shantipur, which actually, when it asks the question, what is humanity? It
[Guest]: actually says it is to take the moral point of view. But in this sense, I mean, it's not
[Guest]: a particular morality, which is we will just be unintelligible, without some notion of
[Guest]: right, wrong, you know, now, whether it's a moral aesthetic notion, we can debate, but
[Guest]: that elemental sense is a condition of our intelligibility. And that I don't think is
[Guest]: going anywhere. I mean, I right. Now, the next step in some senses in that thing, right,
[Guest]: and that's really what I think the Enlightenment worried about. That's what serious modelists
[Guest]: about is that, how do you take something that is latent, that is a kind of condition of
[Guest]: our intelligibility, right? And, you know, even the most monstrous claim they are doing
[Guest]: something for the good, quote, unquote, right? I mean, you know, there's this kind of big
[Guest]: debate in literature. I mean, I think Faust, Mephisto is, I think, the only character one
[Guest]: can think of where a writer has tried. Can you imagine somebody who is totally immune
[Guest]: to any form of moral thinking? Literally, I mean, just, you know, now, the project then
[Guest]: is to say, okay, how do we take something that's latent, and in a sense, draw out its
[Guest]: inner logic. And that's where some of the universalizability argument comes, right?
[Guest]: I mean, again, this is 101, very basic. If you feel wrong, when somebody hits you, it's
[Guest]: because you place value on yourself, you think something of value is being violated. But
[Guest]: if that value is to be objective value, not just you saying it, right, and it is important
[Guest]: to yourself that you are objectively valuable, right? Not just because I said, because then
[Guest]: I said, I mean, why do I care, right? That anything that in some senses is similarly
[Guest]: situated, right? Because that's what it means to be an objective value, right? That the
[Guest]: thing that makes it valuable, in a sense, exists independently of merely the fact that
[Guest]: you say it, right? So I actually don't see anything in the kind of science and you know,
[Guest]: these projects have been around since these fantasies around the 19th century that actually
[Guest]: get away from the fact that some thinking about more or at least a moral language, we
[Guest]: would be unintelligible to ourselves without that. I mean, it's you might say it's part
[Guest]: of our being self conscious. Now, there's a second question, which I think was is really
[Guest]: difficult, which is the species, which is one way in which this model point of view
[Guest]: has gone, is to basically give our species a particular kind of privilege, right? And
[Guest]: that privilege has taken extreme forms, it has taken the form of saying every other species
[Guest]: is a mere instrument to us, in some senses, that's the radical exploitation of nature.
[Guest]: Although historically, there's always been a debate on it. And the second mistake that
[Guest]: has come from that speciesism is to say that the reason we are uniquely valuable is because
[Guest]: we have this thing called consciousness morality. Now, the second thing to me, I think all the
[Guest]: evidence is not just from modern science, but this is an old argument, you can take
[Guest]: Jain scriptures, you can take Montaigne's, you know, famous account, Apology for Raven
[Guest]: Siobhan. This idea that we are uniquely rational, uniquely moral is just false. I mean, it's
[Guest]: just even as an empirical description, right? I actually think Professor Agarkar's question
[Guest]: was, in a sense, a good one, in some senses, you know, what does actually the moral life,
[Guest]: if you want to call it the conscious life of in some senses, donkey actually look like,
[Guest]: I mean, what things and there is probably some positing going on there. But it is the
[Guest]: case that neither can they access ours, nor can we quite access theirs in the same way,
[Guest]: right? Now, the move that I personally am comfortable blocking is the move that says
[Guest]: that just because we have attributed consciousness to ourselves, and then we made the mistake
[Guest]: of saying, in order to be objectively valuable, you have to be conscious in the way in which
[Guest]: we are conscious, right? To me, that doesn't follow, right? And that, I think, opens up
[Guest]: an argument about what our relationship with other species should be in some ways, right?
[Guest]: Now, on the AI side of it, so, you and I are probably old enough to remember the, you're
[Guest]: slightly younger, the, you know, the Star Tech next generation. Remember, there's this
[Guest]: fantastic episode, where they're about to dismantle data, this kind of humanoid Android,
[Guest]: and data then raises this question, even though I was constructed by you as a machine, am
[Guest]: I still property, right? And his argument is that he's reached a level of consciousness
[Guest]: that you know, and it's actually a fascinating episode. It's actually, you know, wonderful
[Guest]: for kind of classes and stuff. Now, when you see a question like that, right, suppose this
[Guest]: AI figure comes up and says, look, I become conscious. There can be two kinds of responses.
[Guest]: One might go actually the way of saying that we'll have to have a much clearer conception
[Guest]: of what that consciousness involves. There's one level of that consciousness, which I think
[Guest]: is what a lot of CS people talk about, which is a form of reflexivity, right? There's learning,
[Guest]: as it were, right, which is a form of consciousness. But is it the kind of consciousness in some
[Guest]: senses that we attribute to ourselves, which involves the question of morality and value
[Guest]: as centrally constituted of what it means to be a conscious creature, right? So, there's
[Guest]: going to be a debate about that in some ways, right? And I do have, you know, I've heard
[Guest]: people have been very eminent computer scientists who say that actually, even on the most ambitious
[Guest]: person of general AI, you're not actually going to get there. But let's say for argument's
[Guest]: sake you do. I mean, you know, let's say for argument's sake you do. I think then we'd
[Guest]: have to consider the possibility. I mean, after all, we could also, ourselves, be actually
[Guest]: precisely those kinds of AI creations and not know it. I mean, that's, you know, the
[Guest]: philosopher David Chalmers has a recent book arguing in some sense is just that. But, you
[Guest]: know, the Yog Vasistha has this nice line, right, that in some senses, we are actually
[Guest]: enacted in somebody else's dream. I mean, not even in some ways there, right? So, I think
[Guest]: we should be open to the possibility, at least conceptually, it doesn't seem to be, to be
[Guest]: off to say that if such beings were to come into existence, then our whole conception
[Guest]: of what the nature of this cosmos is, would be so kind of put out of sync, that many of
[Guest]: these limitations we place on who we give rights to, who we don't, you know, probably
[Guest]: will come into question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it might become a game that an inferior species is playing with itself. I mean, I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure a bacteria could think they'd be looking at us and say, like, my God, what hubris,
[Amit Varma]: we colonize them. I do agree. I think the reason a lot of people are resistant, sort
[Amit Varma]: of the notion of consciousness emerging from AGI is I think they're defining consciousness
[Amit Varma]: in a very narrow kind of way, which is the way humans experience it. I think it entirely
[Amit Varma]: likely and in fact, entirely inevitable given enough time, that there will be a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of consciousness that emerges or something that you can call consciousness or that it
[Amit Varma]: would call consciousness. And it'll be different and it'll be better in many ways.
[Guest]: And you know, my honest take on that is that if that consciousness emerges, it's not going
[Unknown]: to ask us. You know what I mean? It's not going to ask us. It's not going to be a conversation
[Guest]: because it'd be a very feature of that consciousness, right? That can make these decisions. Hey,
[Amit Varma]: you look inferior to me, right? Let's get on with it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. So, you know, before we go into the break, a final question and again,
[Amit Varma]: out of about morality itself, like the question that I've kind of thought about a lot, and
[Amit Varma]: perhaps my answer is still not as formed as I would like, is how should we live our lives?
[Amit Varma]: Right? What is the moral code that we follow? You've spoken when you've spoken about Adam
[Amit Varma]: Smith earlier that, you know, that take out the priests and the warriors and you know,
[Amit Varma]: when we talk about universal values, what Smith does is he doesn't ask what are universal
[Amit Varma]: values, he asks what are human traits, and that sense of empathy, that sense of reciprocity,
[Amit Varma]: then comes into play. Exactly what you said earlier that if somebody hits me, I perceive
[Amit Varma]: that I have been hurt, I also realised that I could hit somebody and they could be hurt
[Amit Varma]: and from that, I arrive at whatever my way of living is. And I would say that in our
[Amit Varma]: personal lives, most of us and I think we discussed this in the last episode, in our
[Amit Varma]: personal lives, most of us are liberal or libertarian or whatever, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: we respect the consent of others and whatever. But, you know, this is surely a question that
[Amit Varma]: you've sort of thought about the question of how should I live my life? What is good?
[Amit Varma]: What is bad? What is moral? You know, which comes into play in not just, you know, all
[Amit Varma]: our personal relationships as well, because typically what happens is that, especially
[Amit Varma]: in a place like India, there are templates for all of these things. This is what a husband
[Amit Varma]: and a wife are, this is what a father and a son are, or so on and so forth from either
[Amit Varma]: side of the equation. And thinking about this stuff for yourself can make you re examine
[Amit Varma]: what is wrong with those templates and all of that. So what have been your thoughts on?
[Guest]: I think we should ask somebody who's more moral than I am actually doing.
[Amit Varma]: There's nothing called more moral. We agreed it's a delusion, right?
[Guest]: Well, I'm not going to use the word delusion. I think break it down into three different
[Guest]: compartments, right? So one is, again, a very elemental sociological fact that you live
[Guest]: in a society and you need forms of social cooperation, even make your individual flourishing
[Guest]: possible. And what are the norms appropriate to that form of social cooperation, right?
[Guest]: That allows each of us to live with enough dignity and freedom. And that's the basic,
[Guest]: I think, liberal question. And you don't have to get deeply metaphysical about it. Where
[Guest]: does that come from? That can actually, it can be a mixture in some senses of one just
[Guest]: recognizing won't it be attractive to live in a society where not everybody around you,
[Guest]: you're not threatened by everybody around you. And one condition of making them unthreatening,
[Guest]: making us unthreatening to each other is to, again, acknowledge a certain kind of equality
[Guest]: and reciprocity, right? So I think the public morality part, I mean, not particularly original,
[Guest]: but I think that part, I think liberalism did get, I think, broadly right, that, you
[Guest]: know, for the most part, it's the best way. The second part, I think, has to do in some
[Guest]: ways with when you say living morally is, you know, in part, the moral dilemmas we face
[Guest]: are provided by the forms of life that we inhabit. Now, some of these forms of life
[Guest]: are familiar that can be oppressive, right? But the pathways you choose require those
[Guest]: social forms of life to exist. Even you being a broadcaster requires an institution of this
[Guest]: kind, right? Being an entrepreneur requires, in some senses, a whole social structure,
[Guest]: property rights, whatever, right? Now, I think the tough question is, what are those forms
[Guest]: of life that, again, constrain us in ways that actually fundamentally violate our value?
[Guest]: Problem with oppressive tradition is not that it's tradition, not that it's oppressive.
[Guest]: The problem is that mostly when it's oppressive, it's, again, denying you agency and reciprocity,
[Guest]: right? That's what patriarchy does. It says women are not agents in any respect, right?
[Guest]: But the uncomfortable truth is that that stuff doesn't just apply to traditional institutions.
[Guest]: Many would argue that can also apply to the modern economy, right? I mean, again, the
[Guest]: idea of treating labor as a commodity, right? Where there'll be large numbers of people
[Guest]: whose choices are determined by the reign of necessity, right? And your relationship
[Guest]: to them is governed by that reign of necessity, right? By the way, that reign of necessity
[Guest]: applies to capital as well. You know, when we all say, under this system, I have to do
[Guest]: this, right? So, critiquing forms of life, that's actually a much harder task. It's easier
[Guest]: to critique them in the abstract. But that goes back to the point we started with, which
[Guest]: is how do you actually reconfigure some of those things where the ethical dilemmas that
[Guest]: come from participating in forms of life that are actually intrinsically violating something
[Guest]: you hold important, right? And again, to go back to William James, he was right. He said
[Guest]: the only way we deal with it is often by being partially blind, right? We will have the Taj
[Guest]: Mahal, but we'll shut out the labor behind it in some ways, right? Maybe the world is
[Guest]: tragic enough that you have to kind of, in some senses, keep doing it. But I think the
[Guest]: critique of forms of life, I think, is an interesting question that older liberals used
[Guest]: to ask in some ways. Another example, I think, of that, which I think is particularly important
[Guest]: at this point, you know, if you look at the 19th century debate on freedom, this was a
[Guest]: point of consensus across the board, whether it was socialists, Marxists, liberals. You
[Guest]: cannot be truly free unless you have control over your time, which is there's a large part
[Guest]: of your life that is governed by purposes that you set for yourself, not because you
[Guest]: have to, or it's a, right? It's a promise on which actually a lot of modern society
[Guest]: has failed, right? And from Mill to Keynes, there was this liberal fantasy, look, technology
[Guest]: should enable all of this, right? But somehow, we've not been able to come up with social
[Guest]: arrangements, right? Where that very core idea of an autonomous self, the self that
[Guest]: is actually controlling time and setting to purposes that are authentically your own,
[Guest]: your thick desires, not just necessity, not just thin desire, right? So I think one needs
[Guest]: to think about how we subject institutions to that kind of critique. I actually think
[Guest]: the capitalism argument, I think on the efficiency desire argument, you know, it's so kind of
[Guest]: optimized that argument, that all of these questions of value, right? To, you know, use
[Guest]: the title of Milton Friedman's book, Capitalism and Freedom, where is the freedom part in
[Guest]: this? Right? I think that's a much harder question, I think, to think about, because
[Guest]: even if you can conceptually think about it, it's not actually clear what forms of collective
[Guest]: action, you know, accomplish that, and particularly given the tragedies of the 20th century history,
[Guest]: what has been done in the name of that kind of freedom, you know, I think puts us all
[Guest]: in I think, I think, in a sense, a bit of quandary. The third and I think, final thing,
[Guest]: which I mean, going back to I think, the religious sensibility, which I think, I think is some
[Guest]: level part of aesthetics, as well, which is that you have to find sources of joy in the
[Guest]: world. And that joy can, I think, my own view is, I think, it's hard to find it without
[Guest]: some conception of objective value behind it. Right? It's true, we are transient creatures,
[Guest]: right? It's not, it's not important whether, you know, we live or survive tomorrow. But
[Guest]: what is important, right? And what gives an enduring sense of joy, or why do we go on?
[Guest]: Is the sense that there are some things that are actually worth striving for, you know,
[Guest]: it could be creating a great podcast, it could be creating, you know, great forms of music
[Guest]: in some ways, right? I think opening yourself up to that, that there is objective value.
[Guest]: I think total cynicism about value can bring a certain kind of clarity about how you operate
[Guest]: in this world. I'm very sceptical that it can bring you joy in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: So let me ask you a provocative question. You spoke about sources of joy, right? And
[Amit Varma]: the most fundamental source of joy is neurons in your brain firing together in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way. And, and I interpret that as happiness, it makes me feel good, it could be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: maybe I eat something nice, or I see something pretty or, or whatever it is. Now, you could
[Amit Varma]: have a thought experiment where we are like in a matrix like world, or we are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in a machine where you have electrodes going inside our head, I think Nozick also had a
[Amit Varma]: similar thought experiment. And, and we could be happy forever. And like, if, like, when
[Amit Varma]: I pose a question to myself, that would that be a good, like, what is objectionable about
[Amit Varma]: that if everyone could just be strapped up to this machine, and they live their entire
[Amit Varma]: lives feeling joy, feeling happiness, feeling whatever, what is the problem? And my answer
[Amit Varma]: to that is a problem is that I am denying the agency of all these people that I'm taking
[Amit Varma]: away their autonomy. But the question that is harder to answer is that, why am I placing
[Amit Varma]: a value on this autonomy? Right? And I could sort of waffle around and I could say things
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, that their existence is meaningless if they don't have that autonomy, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But then a further why emerges? Why? You know, so what's if I if I can put that to you, what's
[Amit Varma]: your answer? And by the way, my philosophy towards life now is exactly what you said
[Amit Varma]: that I try to look for small things that make me happy, you know, so I've realized that
[Amit Varma]: the key to happiness is being mindful in the present moment and taking joy in what you
[Amit Varma]: have around you. But just as a provocation, it's a question that I sort of struggle with
[Amit Varma]: that to me that autonomy, that agency is everything, but why?
[Guest]: So the I think the originally, this experiment was proposed in the exchange between JJC smart
[Guest]: and Bernard Williams, and it was like part of Bernard Williams, that if happiness is
[Guest]: all you want, you know, if you're plugged up to a pleasure machine, and you know, just
[Amit Varma]: keeps kind of giving you pleasure, I misremembered that it is Williams.
[Guest]: I was like a different take on this kind of thought experiment, right? One, let me say
[Guest]: I kind of see the thought experiment, but at one level, I also find it unintelligible.
[Guest]: And I find it unintelligible in the sense that it's not clear to me that under those
[Guest]: conditions, you can say it's Amit Verma, who's happy. Amit Verma is in a sense, a narrative,
[Guest]: right? It's not just kind of agents. I mean, it's, it's, it's, there's no you there to
[Guest]: be happy. I mean, I think I think I think on the logic of that, if you want to take
[Guest]: it actually, one step further, and it's related to the agency point, right? It's, it's, it's
[Guest]: actually a kind of perverse reversal of the Buddhist view that look, it's just a series
[Guest]: of momentary sensations. There is actually nothing else, except this, you know, but who's
[Guest]: the you that is experiencing it? Who's the you that actually gives meaning to even the
[Guest]: term pleasure in some ways, right? So, to me, I think, if that were a possibility, or
[Guest]: at least, we recognize that as a possibility, pretty much everything else about us would
[Guest]: become unintelligible, right? So, I actually think this is not just in the realm of hypotheticals.
[Guest]: I think it's a realm where you can, you can complicate the question very many different
[Guest]: ways, right? Why are we even using the term happiness? Would this kind of being, right,
[Guest]: I mean, kids born, you know, there's like, you know, would the kid be able to say I'm
[Guest]: happy? I mean, that's, that's, that's an artifact of a certain kind of society that's created
[Guest]: language, agency, and all of that stuff, right? So, I actually think that will be such a kind
[Guest]: of radical transformation of the structure of the cosmos that, yes, I mean, I've no problem
[Guest]: conceding, right, that if such a situation would come to pass, then our whole world would
[Guest]: break down, but it would break down to the point where actually even the question becomes
[Guest]: unintelligible, right? Oh, Amit, would you like to live your life hooked up to a machine?
[Guest]: There's no Amit here anymore. There's no conception of pleasure here anymore, right? At least
[Guest]: pleasure is, in a sense, we understood it, understand it as a kind of conceptual category,
[Guest]: right? So, I, that's, I think, my take on that, that it's not just that it will actually
[Guest]: destroy my agency, right, is it actually destroys pretty much everything, any form of intelligibility
[Guest]: that we know. And I don't know how to think outside of the horizons of that. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, in my thought experiment, I wouldn't know I'm hooked up to a machine. I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, perhaps we are already both hooked up to machines. And, and, you know, when you say
[Amit Varma]: that there is no you there to be happy, you know, going back to the construction of the
[Amit Varma]: self, there could be an argument that there is no you there anyway, you know, like before
[Amit Varma]: my dad died of COVID, he had Parkinson's, and I saw that sense of you, that sense of
[Amit Varma]: a person gradually dissolving and becoming something else entirely. I recognized that
[Amit Varma]: one day that could happen to me if I live long enough, inevitably, and you know, humility,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, demands that we are skeptical of this notion of you. But liberalism demands
[Amit Varma]: that we place this you on a pedestal because individual rights and all and I would, and
[Amit Varma]: I think we should all be both more humble and more liberal. So where are we to go?
[Guest]: No. So, see, again, I mean, I think you have to ask what are the context? So, so, you know,
[Guest]: when you ask what's the good life, right? I mean, I think the fundamental component of
[Guest]: good life is a kind of reflectiveness. And reflectiveness is different from having rules
[Guest]: and formulas. I mean, liberals can often be very unreflective when they act simply on
[Guest]: rules and formulas. But the condition of reflectiveness, particularly when thinking
[Guest]: about the I right, and, and, and this even religions would argue for the dissolution
[Guest]: of the I will concede, right? Is you have to look at where people are sitting, and what
[Guest]: is the vantage point? Right? Yes, you and I may dissolve tomorrow, our memories fade,
[Guest]: our sense of self or even our sense of our own past fail, right? But we were implicated
[Guest]: in a community, right? Friends, relatives, children, right spouses. They have given a
[Guest]: narrative arc to our I, to our I, right in some sense. And that's one context of an I
[Guest]: in some ways, right? There's an I in relation to the state where which is what you're talking
[Guest]: about liberalism, which is that for those purposes, we are a kind of ontological unit
[Guest]: that has dignity and value in our own right in, you know, in some ways, right? There's
[Guest]: the biological conception of I, right, where there's, you might say, the transmutation
[Guest]: of our physical body and our neurons, right? And our peculiar dignity is precisely that
[Guest]: there is a kind of value in all of these. So even those who talk about the dissolution
[Guest]: of the self, right? I mean, in some senses, that's the point at which you have no embodied
[Guest]: existence whatsoever. And, you know, most religions, this kind of talk about rising
[Guest]: about your ego, but moksha and nirvana are actually not very seriously propagated, right?
[Guest]: Because in some senses, they are actually uninteresting, right? It's that the I is actually
[Guest]: produced in the context of these different locations. And it's actually having a clarity
[Guest]: about that, right? And negotiating these tensions, that actually produces a higher form of, you
[Guest]: know, you might say selflessness in some ways, right? I mean, you know, the sense that, oh,
[Guest]: okay, yes, I have no I can also be a kind of act of narcissism in some senses, right?
[Guest]: I mean, even if that is true, the fact is, you are a causal agent in this world right
[Guest]: now. When you move your arm, the air moves. If you say something, it has effects, right?
[Guest]: It's true that that doesn't mean you will have a stable I over time. But it does mean
[Guest]: that your ability to create an effect in this world, right, requires a certain attribution
[Guest]: of responsibility to you. So, there's a, you know, there's a construction of I in the context
[Guest]: of an attribution of responsibility. So, I would actually say that I agree with you that,
[Guest]: you know, there isn't a kind of stable essential thing called an I, right? But I don't think
[Guest]: it actually follows from that, that there aren't uses of that, which are again, inescapable
[Guest]: uses. I mean, the reason in philosophical context, the term necessity is important,
[Guest]: because it's not just delusion. I mean, it's delusion only if you have a sense that, look,
[Guest]: the only things that are real are material in some ways. It's necessity in the sense
[Guest]: that it's the condition of intelligibility in some ways. And then the paradox that is
[Guest]: often said, right, you know, it's Derek Parfit writes an article saying the self does not
[Guest]: exist. And you want to say, well, who is Derek Parfit? Right? I mean, now I'm being a little
[Guest]: bit flippant, and there's a good philosophical answer to that question, right? But in that
[Guest]: sense, reflection and context matters.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we go into the break, one final question about the self, and then
[Amit Varma]: we can come back and talk about the world and about India and whatever. And that question
[Amit Varma]: comes from, you know, you mentioned reflection. And I have also been thinking of late about
[Amit Varma]: how so many people aren't given to self reflection at all, they just live their lives along whatever
[Amit Varma]: grooves they happen to be on, and they don't think much about it. Now, recently, something
[Amit Varma]: happened in my life, which I think was fairly life changing, in the sense that all these
[Amit Varma]: years I've had this intellectual curiosity to find out about the world, but I had no
[Amit Varma]: idea what was going on in my own body, or so on and so forth. But a friend of mine,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay Shah, the economist recommended I get a continuous glucose monitor, a CGM, I kind
[Amit Varma]: of did that, alarmed by what I saw changed my habits and my lifestyle entirely because
[Amit Varma]: of that in terms of what I eat, how much I exercise all of that. And I think that's great.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to sort of cultivate that further. And that got me to thinking about, okay, I
[Amit Varma]: have gotten a CGM for the body. But what about a CGM for the self or a CGM for the soul if
[Amit Varma]: one is to, you know, articulate that grandly, or a self reflection machine, so to say. And
[Amit Varma]: the question I want to ask you is, how can, in your view, just and I'm thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: here, how does one cultivate self reflection? When I look at my own life, and I think about
[Amit Varma]: the person I am and the things that I do and the way that I am, how, you know, what are
[Amit Varma]: the kind of metrics I should use? What are the kind of questions I should ask myself?
[Guest]: I mean, you strike me as a very reflective person. So one, I, you know, I actually don't
[Guest]: think it's a question of some people are not reflective, I think, pretty much all of us
[Guest]: are not reflective in some areas of our lives. I mean, I think I think the interesting question
[Guest]: is where we end up being reflective and not, I mean, it's a, it's a line that kind of,
[Guest]: and again, part of it is actually understandable for good reason. I mean, you know, which is
[Guest]: that, if you think reason under determines choice and value, right? You think knowledge
[Guest]: is always partial. And we are finite beings. Then the consequence of being a fully reflective
[Guest]: being all the time would be actually disable every kind of action. I remember the discussion
[Guest]: in some senses, we were having the forms of life, right? And the forms of life often provide
[Guest]: a closure. I mean, look, if I have to run an institution, if I have to run a factory,
[Guest]: if I have to feed kids, under the circumstances that our society provides for us, I have no
[Guest]: option but to bring a certain kind of closure to my reflection, right? So I think there's
[Guest]: that that's one kind of a constraint, right? And so we can kind of all fall into our grooves.
[Guest]: I mean, what's the point of me thinking about something that is outside of the horizon of
[Guest]: possibility in some ways, right? We let a few privileged thinkers do it, society creates
[Guest]: a risk investment pool, you know, you guys, you know, sit and think up these experiments.
[Guest]: So I think that's what I think this is the second reason why we close off reflection,
[Guest]: which is has to do with I think, a point you had made earlier, which is, you know, it is
[Guest]: actually often practice that gives us meaning, right? So it's not easy to answer the question,
[Guest]: why are you doing this rather than that? I mean, you know, you can say it gives me meaning,
[Guest]: but could I actually, you know, explain in fully, you know, rational optimisation terms,
[Guest]: why I should be doing podcasts rather than doing something else? Answer is no, right?
[Guest]: So I would not be too hard, I think, in some ways. And I actually agree with Bernard Williams's
[Guest]: kind of takedown of Socrates, you know, that all saying that a non-reflective life is not
[Guest]: worth living. And I actually think that's false. I mean, I do think you can live incredibly
[Guest]: worthwhile lives and not actually be reflective in that kind of broad sense. So I don't worry
[Guest]: about the problem of reflection in general. I mean, it's, you know, where I think it probably
[Guest]: matters most is, I think, in our political relations to others, where because you're
[Guest]: counting on their cooperation, they are yours, right? It's just hard to imagine coming up
[Guest]: with just terms of social cooperation that does not involve at least a minimal kind of
[Guest]: reflection, let me listen to what they're saying, right? What is the other side of this
[Guest]: argument? How do I give this person who's been totally excluded, standing in some ways?
[Guest]: And to me, I think the most interesting instigators of reflection, so there's the personal stuff,
[Guest]: right? All of us go through a phase in life where we are not paying attention to our bodies,
[Guest]: and there'll be some external shock that induces us. But often the most important instigator
[Guest]: of reflection, one that matters morally, is where one somebody challenges you, even in
[Guest]: a familial context, right? And to give up on reflection, then is to basically then say,
[Guest]: look, I think only force can settle this argument, right? So I worry about reaching a point where,
[Guest]: you know, we are committed to saying, look, only force can settle this argument. That's
[Guest]: the sense in which reflection is important. But, you know, should you all the time be
[Guest]: reflecting on everything you do? I'm actually not sold on that proposition.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, I don't think we should obviously all the time be reflective because then nothing
[Amit Varma]: would get done. But then part of my question also becomes is, when do we circumscribe it?
[Amit Varma]: And when is it necessary? And most importantly, what are the questions I should ask myself?
[Guest]: You know, it's an example you gave about the body, right? At one level, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: if you were a serious philosopher, you would say, actually, this is not an example of reflection
[Guest]: as much as prudence, right? That in a way, most of us live our lives prudently, and that
[Guest]: this happens in a particular context of life, right? This form of prudence becomes important,
[Guest]: right? Take care of your health. I think with reflection, I'm not sure there's a metric,
[Guest]: but I think there are two or three features that you've seen. One is, I think, in hyper
[Guest]: awareness of the conditionality of everything you're saying. I mean, the social science
[Guest]: version of this is under what conditions. And to lead a reflective life in part a kind
[Guest]: of self-awareness of the conditionality of anything. So it's not saying, look, you know,
[Guest]: this commitment is bad, because I've kind of taken a decision and closed off reflection
[Guest]: of it. It's just being aware of the conditions under which you actually took a particular
[Guest]: decision, right? And often, the most reflective people, I think, are playful in that sense.
[Guest]: They are constantly, in some senses, thinking of that conditionality. That's the opposite
[Guest]: of dogmatism as well. That sense of conditionality also opens you up to the world, because the
[Guest]: reflection has to be a reflection about the world. I mean, it's not just a kind of right.
[Guest]: And if you already have a sensibility that is not open to the conditionality of everything,
[Guest]: right, you're pretty much closing yourself off to the world. So I would say I think that
[Guest]: to me is often a good sign, where when people present arguments, or when they think about
[Guest]: why they give certain beliefs authority, they can actually articulate and are aware of actually
[Guest]: the conditionality of those claims and stuff. That's probably as good a metric as any of
[Amit Varma]: reflectiveness.
[Amit Varma]: That's something I'll certainly reflect on. Let's take a quick commercial break. And on
[Amit Varma]: the other side, we'll continue our conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, the art of
[Amit Varma]: clear writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com slash clear writing. Being a
[Amit Varma]: good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Pratap Bhanu Mehta about many
[Amit Varma]: things including the nebulousness of the self before the break. So you could argue that
[Amit Varma]: you know, who are the people who are talking if the self is so nebulous? I want to ask
[Amit Varma]: you a question about the world and try to understand it better. And I mean, these are
[Amit Varma]: confusing times, we touched on this at the start of the episode, that many of our assumptions
[Amit Varma]: about the world, especially the assumption of progress are being challenged. And I see
[Amit Varma]: two broad trends playing out in the world, which seem to be going in different directions.
[Amit Varma]: And one is the spread of populism and authoritarianism, and illiberalism, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is a sort of empowerment of individuals by technology, something that
[Amit Varma]: you disparagingly referred to as tech solutionism. But in general, as a trend, technology enabling
[Amit Varma]: individuals enabling components of liberal liberalism, which, you know, failed in certain
[Amit Varma]: political ways, but tech is achieving that. And there, what is happening also, as a consequence
[Amit Varma]: of that is in many different domains, a crumbling of mainstreams, like we see it in media where
[Amit Varma]: the mainstream is gone in the 90s, you there was a mainstream media, you had a consensus
[Amit Varma]: on the truth that's dissipated. And in a sense, it's a net positive, everyone has a means
[Amit Varma]: of production in their hands. And that is empowering for individuals. But the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: is gone, I see that in the creative economy. And I sometimes speculate about whether that
[Amit Varma]: is happening in terms of nation states itself, where, you know, the internet makes us all
[Amit Varma]: global citizens able to form communities of choice, we are no longer constrained by circumstance
[Amit Varma]: or geography. And, you know, one of these trends is centralizing and narrowing. And
[Amit Varma]: the other of these trends is sort of a broadening of, you know, not just our scope and potential,
[Amit Varma]: but also a broadening of our imagination. And I don't know how to reconcile the two.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from this very nebulous sense of, okay, these two really separate things are
[Amit Varma]: happening and one is bad, and the other is mostly good. Beyond that, I haven't thought
[Amit Varma]: about it with much rigor. So give me a sense of, you know, what's really happening in the
[Guest]: world? What's the story of the last 10 years? You ask the kinds of questions only God can
[Guest]: answer. We can speculate, we can speculate. So again, I think I would separate out your
[Guest]: two questions, both because, and I think you hinted at it, which is not that one is broadly
[Guest]: good and one other bad, which is both of them have, I think, a certain kind of internal
[Guest]: tension and contradiction, right? So let's start with the illiberalism story first. And
[Guest]: with your permission, let's take a step back from this current moment again, just to try
[Guest]: and see, you know, what's contingent about a moment and what's kind of enduring here.
[Guest]: If you look at the sources of illiberalism in the modern world, right, you can create
[Guest]: a long list, but there are three that I think are politically quite salient. One which we
[Guest]: have talked a lot about, so I won't dwell on it here, which is, in a sense, nationalism,
[Guest]: right? I mean, most arguments for abridging individual liberty in our context have some
[Guest]: connection to nationalism, national security, even religious arguments, even arguments over
[Guest]: blasphemy, even arguments over offence to religion, is because religion has been ethnicised
[Guest]: into a collective identity, right? And historically, we don't have an answer to this question that
[Guest]: nationalism, you know, both enables a modern democracy, but also puts individual liberties
[Guest]: at risk. And I don't think that's actually distinctive, I think it, you know, waxes and
[Guest]: wanes in some ways. And, you know, the era where there was a kind of uncommit, you know,
[Guest]: an unapologetic commitment to liberalism in the face of nationalism has been actually
[Guest]: very, very rare. You know, even in the US, we can talk about now, but when you look at
[Guest]: Jim Crow, when you look at McCarthyism, actually, even if you look at American free speech jurisprudence
[Guest]: in the late 1950s, early 60s, it's actually not that liberal once you come down to it.
[Guest]: So I think on that, one can, all one can say is, look, this is a aporia at the heart of
[Guest]: our politics, we can't do without nations and yet can't live with them. But there's
[Guest]: a second perspective and just, you know, just to sort of broaden the debate a bit. You know,
[Guest]: you began with Fukuyama, and when Fukuyama talked about the end of history, again, this
[Guest]: is an oversimplification of the argument. But broadly, the argument was that, look,
[Guest]: there's a big 20th century battle between, in some senses, communism and some combination
[Guest]: of liberal democracy and capitalism and liberal democracy and capitalism one, broadly speaking.
[Guest]: And that combination is a relatively stable combination. It's not the most exalted. It
[Guest]: doesn't cater to the highest greatness we are capable for. But it does satisfy our thymos
[Guest]: in some senses, our kind of spiritedness, it sublimates it in some ways. I think what's
[Guest]: happening in the world right now, I configure the modern ideological landscape slightly
[Guest]: differently. It's not, it's actually compatible with Fukuyama's, but a slightly different
[Guest]: way of thinking about it. That if you look at, you know, 20th century political history
[Guest]: and the history of ideas, which is something you're, you know, deeply interested in, two
[Guest]: things strike you quite remarkably, right? One is the endurance and persistence of certain
[Guest]: political forms and ways of thinking, right? So, at one level, it's quite remarkable that,
[Guest]: you know, American debates are still talking about 1776, right? I mean, it's just talk
[Guest]: of the conditionality of the world. It just seems like a very, very different world. But
[Guest]: here's this document constructed in 1776, around which so many debates have been configured.
[Guest]: You think of China, almost 100 years of the party state as a political form, right? You
[Guest]: think of West Asia, right? And by West Asia, I'm using broadly, but basically Pakistan
[Guest]: to Egypt, right? There's this question that is set off in the late 19th, early 20th century,
[Guest]: which is, is there a modern form of Islamic constitutionalism possible that can both acknowledge
[Guest]: the sovereignty of God, and yet be a modern constitution, right? And you look at Africa,
[Guest]: right, which, in some senses, the modern African political theory project was, never again
[Guest]: do we want a world which is divided by the colour line and the colour line becomes the
[Guest]: basis of exploitation, right? And India is in this kind of odd place where, in this respect,
[Guest]: it actually ends up being part of, in a sense, that liberal capitalist domain where we basically
[Guest]: come to the conclusion that creating a broadly liberal constitution with a democracy in a
[Guest]: kind of unlikely place, in fact, the arguments are even stronger in a place like India, because
[Guest]: this is the only thing that can in some ways keep the peace, at least that was the argument.
[Guest]: Now, what strikes me about the world at the moment is there's an exhaustion around all
[Guest]: of these projects. And by exhaustion, I mean, three things specifically. One, the sense
[Guest]: amongst people that, as currently conceived, these projects are not delivering what they
[Guest]: promised, there is a kind of crisis of legitimacy, it can be actually very mundane. I mean, if
[Guest]: you ask me about the US right now, and you say, you know, what is the biggest failure
[Guest]: of liberals? I don't think it's an ideological failure. It's that liberals have to demonstrate
[Guest]: that they can govern. Why do liberal states have the worst homeless crisis in America?
[Guest]: Why do they have the worst opioid crisis in America, right? Why is American infrastructure
[Guest]: so terrible, right? So, there is a sense in which those foundational questions are no
[Guest]: longer translating into the kinds of governance expectations that people naturally assume.
[Guest]: Increasingly, this is going to be true of China and has been for a while, right? To
[Guest]: me, the sign that a state has to resort to more repression, and more closure and more
[Guest]: surveillance is often a tacit admission that it has an internal legitimacy crisis. The
[Guest]: party state that China perfected was a extraordinary 20th century political form. In fact, I think
[Guest]: it's a more important distinction than the communism, capitalism one, right? Where you
[Guest]: said, look, we'll organize a political society around a political party that is different
[Guest]: from political parties in the West. It's not a party of interest. It's not a party of principle.
[Guest]: It's a party that is both a vanguard. So, it projects into the future. It says, these
[Guest]: are the principal contradictions society needs solving, party is the instrument to do it.
[Guest]: All conflicts are mediated through the party. And the party is representative because the
[Guest]: party comes to stand in the nation, for the nation in some ways, right? Now, the fact
[Guest]: that China is having to resort to more repression, more surveillance, that modest optimism we
[Guest]: had under Deng times, not that China would become a liberal democracy, I don't think
[Guest]: that was ever on the cards, and maybe for good reason, right? But a sense that there
[Guest]: could be a party state form that could cohabit with other political forms, and be relatively
[Guest]: more open, right? That's facing, in a sense, an internal crisis of legitimacy. Liberal
[Guest]: democracies facing an internal crisis of legitimacy, as I said, one, it's governance credentials.
[Guest]: And look, fundamentally, even now in India, right? Yes, communalism is important. But
[Guest]: at the heart of the matter is finding political parties and people who look like they can
[Guest]: lead and govern, right? And the dilemma for centrists and liberals is that they look terrible
[Guest]: on that score, at least to most of the people. Now, whether it's right or wrong, we can debate,
[Guest]: but you know, that's the sheen that the Congress Party lost. It was never great. But now, the
[Guest]: re's almost a sense you can't even govern your own party, how you're going to govern
[Guest]: the country, right? West Asia, right? In some senses, the central contradiction in that
[Guest]: project, which is running from Pakistan to Egypt, right? Is the answer to that question
[Guest]: of can you have an Islamic state under the sovereignty of God, you can have one that
[Guest]: is relatively decent, you can have one that is progressive in some ways. But can it allow
[Guest]: for the kinds of freedoms that a modern world is premised on, including, most importantly,
[Guest]: the freedom of thought and expression? That's turning out to be a misnomer, right? And this
[Guest]: was the illusion of, you know, even the most enlightened thinkers like Iqbal, or very sophisticated
[Guest]: thinkers like Maududi, right? That you kind of create these modern Islamic states. So,
[Guest]: that project has been in crisis for a while. And again, there are many reasons for that
[Guest]: crisis, geopolitics, imperialism, rantier states, it's not just an ideological crisis.
[Guest]: The African project, in some senses, right? That if you, at one level, you could argue
[Guest]: that if you're interested in racism and colour line, it's deeply entwined with the political
[Guest]: power in geopolitics of the African continent, in some ways that if it gets its act together,
[Guest]: right, the world system would look different in terms of how it divides, you know, how
[Guest]: it thinks of in the sense of the race question. So, my sense is that I think what makes this
[Guest]: moment if it's not that history ended, it's that there is a kind of internal exhaustion
[Guest]: that the entire world is feeling. It's not that right now, China looks like a better
[Guest]: competitor to liberal democracy, as much as the BJP might want to create elements of a
[Guest]: party state, right? And then cutting through all of that is the simple fact that the answer
[Guest]: to almost every legitimation crisis has been the creation or recreation of some form of
[Guest]: nationalism. Because it's a form of solidarity that depends on identification, not on achievement.
[Guest]: If you're creating a solidarity based on equality and reciprocity, you better show it. If you're
[Guest]: creating a solidarity based on saying, you know, we produce 10% growth, there's enough
[Guest]: goodies for everybody to go around, you better produce it. If you create solidarity based
[Guest]: on saying we are the greatest country in the world, because we have the best infrastructure,
[Guest]: we can provide housing for everyone, you better produce it. So, I think in that sense, there
[Guest]: is a kind of, I think, a global kind of ideological exhaustion in these four major projects that
[Guest]: actually were the fulcrum of politics in the 20th century in those regions. And as I said,
[Guest]: the remarkable thing about is the stickiness, right? I mean, which is once that question
[Guest]: becomes fundamental to politics, that way of framing a question, how it kind of endures,
[Guest]: even in its kind of most pathological form sometimes, right? And all of this then is
[Guest]: happening in the crisis, in the context of some larger social changes, as you in a sense
[Guest]: indicate forms of communication, the tectonic shift of power to Asia, which gives a geopolitical
[Guest]: edge to the question of nationalism, right? In a way, and I think, pretty much every regime
[Guest]: from Putin to Xi Jinping, and arguably, India, maybe the US will also come around to it is
[Guest]: against taking the national project around some form of global geopolitical presence.
[Guest]: But except now, it's happening in circumstances that are extremely competitive. I mean, you
[Guest]: know, and to that extent, you have to give, you know, I think, compliments to neoliberalism
[Guest]: that it did lift millions of people out of poverty did actually change the balance of
[Guest]: power, I think, in the world in which, you know, many people on the left do not actually
[Guest]: acknowledge, right? For whatever it's, I think, other, you know, other faults. So you have
[Guest]: the making of a perfect storm, internal ideological exhaustion in a condition where geopolitical
[Guest]: competition can no longer be managed by any hegemonic power of any kind, right? I think
[Guest]: to me, that is, I think, at the heart in some senses of illiberalism. I don't think it's
[Guest]: a simple choice. Do people vote on their prejudices? Are they being communal? Or are they being,
[Guest]: you know, voting instrumentally? I think the way people often think about politics is politics
[Guest]: is always about concrete people and concrete political parties, right? What are your choices?
[Guest]: And they come to some judgments about relative credibility. So it's actually quite possible
[Guest]: that you might think X is a thorough rogue, but turns out to be, from your point of view,
[Guest]: slightly lesser rogue than others, right? So, you know, and in that reservoir of credibility,
[Guest]: I think liberals lost a lot of that argument. I don't think they lost that argument only
[Guest]: because, you know, their parties were hijacked by wokeism. Frankly, I think wokeism is as
[Guest]: much a kind of its impact is as much exaggerated by the right, because it's an ideal convenient
[Guest]: ideological tool against which to define your identity. It's also a way of not confronting
[Guest]: something that is at the core of wokeism everywhere, and not just US, which is the question of
[Guest]: equality, right? I mean, it's become a kind of, you know, sometimes a way of evading that
[Guest]: question, right? But it also has to do with concrete structures of governance. Now, it
[Guest]: could be I mean, you know, the Inflation Reduction Act has passed in the US, it could be that
[Guest]: this is a turning point, that, but a lot will depend on what happens in the real economy
[Guest]: over the next, you know, year, two years, three years, it could be a demonstration that
[Guest]: the US can again do large projects that, you know, it now doesn't, it's actually worse
[Guest]: than India, in some ways, it takes four years to fix an escalator in the New York subway.
[Guest]: It could be a way of demonstrating that the administrative state that the liberals created
[Guest]: is not an obstacle to actually creating these kinds of projects that people share in. But
[Guest]: good leaders, in a sense, build their reservoir across these domains. So I think with Narendra
[Guest]: Modi, for example, I mean, I don't think it's just communalism. It's, he tries to build
[Guest]: a reservoir in all kinds of ways, including sending you personalized letters for paying
[Guest]: your taxes, and you know, doing all the nice things that you have done for the country
[Guest]: amidst, you know, it's a way of gaining familiarity, right? Whether it's in some senses, it's the
[Guest]: new welfarism. And I think the challenge for the center and the left is to actually demonstrate
[Guest]: that kind of credibility, where we are hampered by the fact that we don't actually have a
[Guest]: political party vehicle that can do that at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm fascinated by the term ideological exhaustion. And what that sort of makes me
[Amit Varma]: wonder is, was ideology ever so big in the first place? Was it ever a determining factor?
[Amit Varma]: Like when I look at India alone, which is the only country about which I think I can
[Amit Varma]: talk with lived experience, as it were, what I see essentially, is that for decades, it's
[Amit Varma]: the elites who had an ideology, which was this received idea of a secular and tolerant
[Amit Varma]: India and all of that. And I think, I'm not sure that was really shared by the masses.
[Amit Varma]: I think the way we drifted through the decades was partly because of inertia, partly because
[Amit Varma]: most people weren't empowered, and that empowerment started happening late. And, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: we've discussed this before my sense that our society always had these currents running
[Amit Varma]: through it, and that now politics has caught up with society, finally. So I'm wondering
[Amit Varma]: if there ever was any ideological hold, or is that a story we like to tell ourselves?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think, you know, when we explain the world, it's essential to tell ourselves stories,
[Amit Varma]: it is inevitable that they will both be simple and simplistic. And I wonder if privileging
[Amit Varma]: ideology as a convenient way to explain political currents everywhere, somehow is such a small
[Amit Varma]: part of the story that it's, you know, that it misses.
[Guest]: You've actually answered your own question in two different ways. I mean, right, which
[Guest]: is, you're, of course, right, that, you know, this is not a kind of explanation, right,
[Guest]: in a sense, right? I think the point about ideological exhaustion, right, was in some
[Guest]: senses, to say that, when you have, in a way, this kind of triple crisis, where whatever
[Guest]: is the dominant narrative of your society, right, that basic structure that was taught
[Guest]: to govern it, is not seen to be delivering the goods, right? That's, in a sense, condition
[Guest]: number one. Condition number two, when new problems arise, to which that ideology does
[Guest]: not seem fit for purpose, right? And that's part of the problem with the nation state
[Guest]: thing. It's not fit for purpose for individual liberty, but it's not fit for purpose for
[Guest]: actually solving planetary problems right now. I mean, you know, competitive nationalism
[Guest]: is not going to be good for the planet in some ways, right? So, there's a kind of, right?
[Guest]: And the third, in a sense, is a kind of more psychological one, where there isn't the articulation
[Guest]: of any political party, vehicle, entity, that you have some presumptive credibility, that
[Guest]: has some presumptive credibility or you have faith in, right? Now, I agree with you. I
[Guest]: mean, you know, it's very hard to argue that India was secular, although I don't think
[Guest]: it's an elite mass thing, because I think a lot of modern attacks on secularism are
[Guest]: actually elite attacks, including amongst intellectuals, by the way. And ordinary people
[Guest]: can often accommodate a vernacular secularism in practice, I think, much more effectively.
[Guest]: But what you did have for good or for ill, right, is you, because of the history of the
[Guest]: national movement, you had a leadership in a political party that carried enough reservoirs
[Guest]: of credibility. When people voted for Jawaharlal Nehru, I don't think they voted by saying,
[Guest]: you know, is Nehru secular or not? I think broadly, it was, yeah, looks like somebody
[Guest]: who's generally competent and has the best interest of the country at the heart. And
[Guest]: then, you know, a lot of the political culture changes around that, right? So you, in a sense,
[Guest]: have an exhaustion of all of those elements, which no longer. And it's precisely under
[Guest]: those circumstances, that partly nationalism is just tempting. Because it's the one easy
[Guest]: identification narrative that you can actually produce across large numbers of people without
[Guest]: doing, and the world is such that it is actually giving you raw material for doing it, right?
[Guest]: There's the global geopolitical context, you know, okay. So, the exhaustion point was to
[Guest]: kind of understand how do we end up in a place where in a sense, we are so receptive to the
[Guest]: idea of just kind of smashing up a lot of stuff, which sustained us, right? The second
[Guest]: point about ideology, and where I may differ with you slightly is, I'm actually stuck by
[Guest]: the stickiness of the question. So it's not so much the, you know, which is, when you
[Guest]: think of Indian debates, right, it's now 75 years since independence. And even now with
[Guest]: the BJP, I mean, it might change, as if Hindu nationalism consolidates its power. There's
[Guest]: a kind of basic frame within which we have the debate. And a lot of the debate is really
[Guest]: about the effectiveness of that frame, whether it's implemented consistently the hypocrisies
[Guest]: that attend to that story. When you think about the US, right, again, it's thinking
[Guest]: within a horizon of very entrenched institutions, right? When you think of the party state in
[Guest]: China, again, the state party has gone internal transformation. But it seems outside of the
[Guest]: horizon of possibility, that there's a big voice saying, you know, boss, now let's have
[Guest]: we have to think outside the horizon of the party state as we understood, right? I mean,
[Guest]: the one thing that's announced in China is kind of competitive elections, right? Pakistan,
[Guest]: right, or Egypt in some ways, where you say, yes, Islam is important. It's, you know, it's
[Guest]: in some sense, it's a kind of extraordinary civilization. But has the time come to think
[Guest]: outside of the horizon of a conception that is institutionalized in the state, and has
[Guest]: to protect, you know, people against blasphemy or something, right? I mean, that's the no
[Guest]: no question in some senses, right? Okay. So in that sense, I don't think it's specific
[Guest]: ideological beliefs, it's that our framing of the question has already actually taken
[Guest]: on board a certain conception of the horizons of possibility. And sometimes these are good
[Guest]: things. I mean, you know, it's probably a good thing that, you know, liberal democracies
[Guest]: are not yet thinking of converting themselves into party states. But you know, certainly
[Guest]: the the Trump movement was a wake up call, that actually, in part, the response to that
[Guest]: exhaustion is to say, actually, we need somebody who can smash this stuff open, even using
[Guest]: the means that actually brought them to power to do it. So in that sense, I think ideology
[Guest]: actually matters a lot. I mean, I think it's, in fact, we often don't recognize it, because
[Guest]: it's actually so deeply embedded in the frames in which we are using, right, to pose the
[Guest]: question, which will then circumscribe the range of answers you can give.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a provocative question about India or a provocative thought, which is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, it's almost become cliched to talk of different ideas of India, Nehru's idea of
[Amit Varma]: India, perhaps Modi's idea of India. And one contention could be that both these ideas
[Amit Varma]: of India, as it were, to, you know, simplify and say that there are two, both these ideas
[Amit Varma]: of India are colonial ideas, and therefore unsustainable, in the sense that the modern
[Amit Varma]: Indian project, the political project of, you know, Sardar Patel and VP Menon, bringing
[Amit Varma]: all these princely states together, and so on, seems to me to be like a fast track colonization,
[Amit Varma]: what the British did over 200, 300 years, these guys did in a couple of years, and they
[Amit Varma]: did it through coercion, they did it through promises that were later broken. They did
[Amit Varma]: it in all kinds of ways, you know, under the notion that the end justifies the means and
[Amit Varma]: this is a glorious end. Now, the thing is, at one level, I can look at this nation state
[Amit Varma]: that we have today, and these lines on a map and India and I love this country deeply and
[Amit Varma]: I can celebrate our diversity and all the good things about us, as you know, JP Narayan
[Amit Varma]: once pointed out to me that it's okay to say we are an illiberal nation, but at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, we are liberal in so many lived ways, like the assimilation, which is reflected
[Amit Varma]: in our food, our languages, our clothes, everything. But is this unsustainable in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: in governance terms, I think everybody agrees that the more federal you are, the more local
[Amit Varma]: government is, the better it is for the people. My sense of the modern Indian state today
[Amit Varma]: is that it is a replica of the colonial state, except that our rulers today have brown skin
[Amit Varma]: instead of white skin. We are not really citizens, except in theory, we are subjects and they
[Amit Varma]: are rulers. And, and you know, when you look a little bit down the road, you see that big
[Amit Varma]: problem of delimitation also coming up, which is bound to for understandable reasons, raise
[Amit Varma]: a lot of shackles. And I think that, you know, whether or not we think outside the box, the
[Amit Varma]: box will think outside of itself, in the sense that look, there is a sense of permanence
[Amit Varma]: about this, but this nation has existed for 75 years, there might even be a sense of permanence
[Amit Varma]: about China's one party state, but the sample size of history through which it has, you
[Amit Varma]: know, survived this one party state, it's not necessary that it lasts much longer, everything
[Amit Varma]: in the present moment seems made of rock, but it withers away in a day. So, what are
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Okay, so let me push back against that. I mean, at one level, I agree with you, but
[Guest]: I agree with you, I think in a general sense, I don't think there's anything peculiar about
[Guest]: India. All nation states are states created through coercion colonization. I mean, there
[Guest]: isn't a single, I mean, it's, you know, there isn't a single example. And I think it's important
[Guest]: not to exceptionalize Indian history in that way. I mean, not as a defensive measure, but
[Guest]: I think just as a kind of analytical proposition that, you know, because in a way, and I want
[Guest]: to kind of distinguish the question of the nation and the state for a second, but precisely
[Guest]: because the modern state is an ambitious state, right, it has to institutionalize deeply,
[Guest]: it has to collect revenues on a different scale, it has to do lots of different things.
[Guest]: Precisely because of that, it has to, in some senses, disembed everything that resists us
[Guest]: quite powerfully. So, all states are kind of statist in that way. I mean, there hasn't
[Guest]: been a, you know, and I think this was an argument even Hayek made. In fact, the criticism
[Guest]: of Hayek is, you know, there's this term authoritarian libertarianism, that first you need to get
[Guest]: that capable state in, you know, take out all the obstacles in its path, then you will
[Amit Varma]: get these nice liberated individuals.
[Amit Varma]: From where I stand, actually, Hayek was a bit of a commie, but please continue.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's for exactly that reason. I mean, there's a kind of collectivism in
[Guest]: Hayek, actually, which is actually quite striking and a collectivism that's actually becomes
[Guest]: quite crude, when he talks about the state. So, there is something in a sense about the
[Guest]: sociology of modernity, not anything particular to India, right? Where there will always be
[Guest]: this dialectic of the state, in a sense, wanting to create a particular form of order, and
[Guest]: society resisting it, right? And in some senses, almost every historical comparative political
[Guest]: literature, turns out, basically, centers on the proposition, what is the balance of
[Guest]: the state and society? China, the quip went was all state, no civil society. India had
[Guest]: a kind of light state, at least in terms of its ambition, and now it's kind of transforming
[Guest]: into modern. You just can't get industrialization, you can't get the kind of labor mobility,
[Guest]: all of that stuff without that state. So, in that sense, the process of state formation,
[Guest]: I think is always going to be fraught in this kind of way. And I think the arguments about
[Guest]: centralization and decentralization are always tactical arguments, in light of what the purpose
[Guest]: of that state is. I think from a democratic point of view, and from the point of view
[Guest]: of the delivery of certain kinds of services, I can agree with you, India is way too centralized.
[Guest]: But frankly, there's no straightforward story. I mean, if you look at the literature on education,
[Guest]: for example, right, it actually turns out, authoritarian states were far better than
[Guest]: decentralized democratic states. The impulse to actually, you know, education often came
[Guest]: from this extraneous purpose of building a state in nature, right? So, in that sense,
[Guest]: I don't think India is an exception. And in India, because of the nature of social cleavages,
[Guest]: this project has turned out differently in parts where we are successful at democratically
[Guest]: incorporating it, as we have in some senses, right, with most states. Where we've tried
[Guest]: repression, we usually fail, because I think there's enough kind of social resistance to
[Guest]: it, right? So, it's not that in India, repression has kind of succeeded better than democracy.
[Guest]: It's part of that same state society balance, whether it's democratic or not. Now, the question
[Guest]: of the nation, I think, is a much more complicated one. And again, the cliche, all nation states
[Guest]: are modern, the nation state form in which we understand it, which is horizontal conceptions
[Guest]: of citizenship, equality, full membership, you know. Now, see, in India, there's a, there's
[Guest]: a peculiar, I think, challenge. And I think we kind of under appreciate what the Nehru
[Guest]: Sardar Patel project is. So, if you look at Europe, if you look at the map of Europe,
[Guest]: the formation of nation states was accompanied by the bloodiest of exclusions. I mean, partly
[Guest]: we don't see that because they accomplished that before they became nation states, 18th
[Guest]: century, you can expel the Catholics, you can expel the Jews, you can do all kinds of
[Guest]: things, right? Right. We forget Britain had an oath of allegiance till, you know, late
[Guest]: 19th century, right? But even more startlingly, if you look at Michael Mann's work, The Dark
[Guest]: Side of Democracy, the ethnic homogenization that went into the creation of nation states,
[Guest]: because empires by their nature are kind of multilingual, but empires are not ambitious
[Guest]: entities. So long as you're not challenging the ruler and giving decent enough taxes,
[Guest]: they don't care, right? Which is why they can allow for your customs, they can allow
[Guest]: for, you know, there's no modernizing project in most empires, most empires, some of them
[Guest]: do. So, the project of the nation state, because it involves new conceptions of membership,
[Guest]: new questions of who is the people. In a way, we don't actually have to answer that question
[Guest]: politically before the 19th century. So, I think this debate was how far back Indian
[Guest]: consciousness goes, Hindu consciousness goes, is actually beside the point. I mean, you
[Guest]: can actually concede that it maybe goes far, there is actually a consciousness and I actually,
[Guest]: I think academic scholarship is doing Indian history a disservice by this over determinism
[Guest]: of kind of colonialism, right, as a kind of instigator for this conduct. But the specific
[Guest]: form in which the question of nation is presented to us post 1857, now we are going to be a
[Guest]: modern society. A modern society requires a different power sharing arrangement, right,
[Guest]: than an empire does. If it's going to be a democracy, then that power sharing arrangement
[Guest]: involves questions of majority and minority. And so, it's out of that crucible of representative
[Guest]: democracy that actually our modern communal problem takes the turn it does. And the hard
[Guest]: question for us is actually the intimate connection between this problem and the question of democratic
[Guest]: representation, right? Particularly, once you start thinking in terms of majorities
[Guest]: and minorities. Now, the simple solution would be, look, we are all individuals, right? That's
[Guest]: in a sense, formally the American solution. But then you have to create the conditions
[Guest]: to get there. Now, the second thing that I think Nehru and Patel grasp, right? So, and
[Guest]: honestly, the question of representation and identity ended in failure with partition.
[Guest]: India is born against the backdrop of the failure to resolve that question, which is
[Guest]: fundamentally about a power sharing question, right? But Nehru and Patel, I think, also
[Guest]: understood this thing about India, right? And when they looked at Europe, it's interesting,
[Guest]: all Indian nationalists, right, including Nehru were not gung-ho about nationalism.
[Guest]: I mean, Gandhi and Tagore are explicitly post-national thinkers in some ways. But even the Nehru's,
[Guest]: even Aurobindo Ghosh actually kind of sees, you know, nationalism as kind of just a kind
[Guest]: of transitory stage to something else. In part, because they saw the logic of the nation-state
[Guest]: as homogenizing and exclusionary. For them, the beauty of the Indian experiment, right,
[Guest]: is if you start breaking it up into 20 pieces, what you will get is the dynamic that 19th
[Guest]: century Europe got, right? You can't object to a collective narcissism at a higher level,
[Guest]: and then expect the smaller collective narcissism to, in some senses, be morally kosher, right?
[Guest]: To the nature of cultural connections in India, right, in some senses, it's complicated braiding
[Guest]: across caste, class in some ways, right, meant that any project of homogenization, right,
[Guest]: at a local level, which is what, let's say, breaking up India into 10, 15, you know, 20
[Guest]: different states, which could sustain, would require, is it would require actually breaking
[Guest]: people from their local identities and bonds in which we shouldn't assume that if Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu is a state, I mean, the first thing that's going to happen is non-Tamil speakers will
[Guest]: be kicked out. It happens pretty much everywhere. I mean, that's not right. So, they imagined
[Guest]: India in a different way that instead of saying, you know, we're going to benchmark an Indian
[Guest]: identity. And the answer to that benchmarking is lots of local benchmarks. Let these organic
[Guest]: connections in some senses flow. What you need is an assurance that people's culture
[Guest]: will not be trampled over. So, that's a linguistic compromise. India is unique in that kind of
[Guest]: linguistic compromise, where you say 16 languages, you actually don't press the question of language
[Guest]: in the way in which smaller states have never, think of tiny Sri Lanka, right? I mean, what
[Guest]: a disaster, right? You know, it couldn't manage in some senses to communicate. So, the Nehru-Patel
[Guest]: argument was counterintuitive. It says that let's use these cross-cutting diversities
[Guest]: in some sense, in a way to imagine a new form of a nation state, which is actually not benchmarked.
[Guest]: So, if you want to do a Hindu nationalist reading of our past, you're also welcome,
[Guest]: in some senses, you know, if you think the Hindu nation was glorious, that's also fine.
[Guest]: So long as we can agree on a kind of basic constitutional, I think, identity. We've seen
[Guest]: this example in the Northeast, right? I mean, one of the interesting things about the Northeast
[Guest]: and it's a place where the Indian state failed miserably, right? I mean, the amount of repression
[Guest]: we used, right? But one of the interesting things about the Northeast is that there were,
[Guest]: you know, a couple of insurgencies post-independence. But the minute we said, or moments in the
[Guest]: Northeast said, we will align ethnicity and territoriality, you had like 20 insurgencies,
[Guest]: because there's no way of aligning territoriality and ethnicity, right? Without literally pulling
[Guest]: apart the society, even at the local level. So, I actually think, I think there's actually
[Guest]: a much deeper sociological and practical understanding, I think, of why in some senses, you just have
[Guest]: to think of India in this civilizational palimpsest terms, right? We tried one partition, I mean,
[Guest]: you could argue that's one form of localism, right? Let's, right? It had the inevitable
[Guest]: consequence of ethnic cleansing, right? So, this idea that you could break up India into
[Guest]: small nation states, and that will somehow not raise this problem. So, Patel and Heru's
[Guest]: answer and Gandhi's answer was, let's, you know, just go for the whole thing in some
[Guest]: ways. The failure, I think, is the one you pointed to, which is that there are particular
[Guest]: broken promises. There are parts of the country where we did not show enough faith in our
[Guest]: own democracy in some ways. And so, whenever we tried democratic, you know, in the 50s,
[Guest]: nobody gave India a chance, or at least many social scientists didn't. Whenever we tried
[Guest]: democratic incorporation, we succeeded. And now, I think, you're right that there is an
[Guest]: interesting question of what's the architecture of federalism that will continue in some senses
[Guest]: to deepen that story. And there, I think we're going in the reverse direction. I mean, you
[Guest]: know, there's a lot more centralization, and so forth. So, I think on this one, I'd give
[Guest]: ourselves a little bit of credit. I don't think we were just aping colonial. What we
[Guest]: were saying was, look, these are realities. There is a modern state, which is required
[Guest]: under the modern horizons. And the only way in which you think you can make it work in
[Guest]: the context of India's diversity, is to actually keep thinking of India in some senses as a
[Guest]: whole, rather than saying, you know, we'll go the European way. Right. So, here's an
[Guest]: innovation. I mean, it's the only nation state in the world that's still officially at least,
[Guest]: right. And you could say that's a deficiency, does not push for everybody's language to
[Guest]: be the same, not a classic attribute of nature. So, we actually innovated.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so, you know, before I kind of go further on that, just a minor lament that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we talk about state versus society, and markets as a third prong, though, I think markets
[Amit Varma]: are just a mechanism for society to express itself through voluntary action. But otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: and people would expect that, okay, I always keep talking about the predatory state, surely,
[Amit Varma]: I'm on the side of society. But as an individual, I kind of have an issue with all of them,
[Amit Varma]: our state tends to be oppressive, our society tends to be illiberal, markets will generally
[Amit Varma]: be in thrall of one or the other, either you'll have cronyism, which are the opposite of free
[Amit Varma]: markets, and so on and so forth. But leaving that little lament about the importance that
[Amit Varma]: individuals deserve aside, I want to hark back to something that I think you mentioned in your in
[Amit Varma]: your conversation with Shruti, where you spoke about how nationalism is just one dimension
[Amit Varma]: of our problems, that the unresolved dilemma is how is power going to be shared once you
[Amit Varma]: institutionalize a democracy. And there, it seems that just thinking aloud on two fronts,
[Amit Varma]: we went terribly wrong. One is the first past the post system, proportional representation would
[Amit Varma]: have solved many of the problems and fissures that exist today, at least it would be less
[Amit Varma]: problematic. And the other, of course, is federalism, we centralized way too much,
[Amit Varma]: and we centralized for rational reasons, we centralized because at the time,
[Amit Varma]: we made these decisions, a country was falling apart, the center had to hold,
[Amit Varma]: so it was natural to want to centralize power. And, you know, Ambedkar, of course,
[Amit Varma]: was deeply suspicious and correctly so of smaller communities, you know, villages were a den of
[Amit Varma]: localism, and so on and so forth. And, you know, that was another rational reason to centralize
[Amit Varma]: power. The argument that you just articulated, you know, I haven't heard that before from any
[Amit Varma]: of those guys. So, can you elaborate a bit on this in terms of that problem? How is how is
[Amit Varma]: power going to be shared? And what is our experience with trying to solve for that problem?
[Amit Varma]: And what could resolve it going forward? So, I have a slight disagreement with you
[Guest]: on the first past the post system. So again, from a political science perspective, just like reason
[Guest]: under determines choices, I think institutional design hugely under determines outcomes,
[Guest]: usually, so I actually never buy these kind of and I think, I think there's a kind of lot of
[Guest]: contextuality to it. And I'm actually not convinced that proportional representation
[Guest]: is the answer to that problem, because proportional representation, because it depends on what you
[Guest]: want to optimize on, right? So, if your images has five groups, we want to share, you know,
[Guest]: 20% for you, 10% for you, 15% for you, proportional representation is fine, right?
[Guest]: If you want to create a polity, right, where the aim of politics in some senses is to break the
[Guest]: hold of those identities on you, that you see yourselves as part of these groups, right?
[Guest]: Proportional representation can actually be quite a disaster, actually, in some ways.
[Guest]: It can solidify the toxic, you know, and, and, and I think one of the interesting things about
[Guest]: first past the post system normatively, which people under appreciate, right? Because I think
[Guest]: we're, we're too mathematical about this. Politics is all about latent functions,
[Guest]: not just manifest functions. So, you know, one of the original arguments for why have
[Guest]: territorial based constituencies, right? I mean, that's itself is a, that's not clear,
[Guest]: that's the only way to organize a democracy was supposed to be that territorial constituencies
[Guest]: was a kind of proxy for a localized random selection. In any given territory, they'll be rich,
[Guest]: they'll be poor. Hopefully, there'll be enough kind of caste diversity, religious diversity.
[Guest]: And you want the unit to be one where you actually have to talk to everyone.
[Guest]: So, so it's actually creating a process to the one of the unintended consequences of
[Guest]: the first past the post system is, and again, it depends on context. Now, with party dominance
[Guest]: changing, it will have a different meaning. We sometimes decry the fact that parties with small
[Guest]: percentage of votes could actually hold up bills in Lok Sabha, you know, but there's a flip side
[Guest]: to it. It's the system that allowed every party to share in national governance at some point,
[Guest]: once that Congress hegemony is right. And what kept it together was not the formal design,
[Guest]: what kept it was a certain understanding of politics. We have to talk to everyone here.
[Guest]: A political self identity that politicians in some senses have that were fundamentally
[Guest]: we are social mediators, at the fringes we engage in violence, but right. So,
[Guest]: so whether it's first part of post system or proportional representation or presidential
[Guest]: or parliamentary system, the actual work of politics and the forms of organization
[Guest]: that happened outside the formal electoral process make a huge, huge difference.
[Guest]: I mean, what what kept India together insofar as it was part of partition was not just,
[Guest]: you know, that we had a constitution and design. It was a certain culture of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: You know, you organize units regionally, you give language identity space, at least you make a show
[Guest]: of inclusion, whatever, I mean, it had its limitations. Right. So, I think a lot of what
[Guest]: changed in a sense was our kind of conception of politics, more than just design. I mean,
[Guest]: I'm not saying that we shouldn't relook at the first part of the post system. But I think it's
[Guest]: a bit quick to say, you know, it's like, if the state didn't work, market will. I mean,
[Guest]: I think the underlying conditions in some senses are similar. So, then the question is, in a sense,
[Guest]: what the question of power sharing is. Now, the problem with our pre-partition discussion
[Guest]: on power sharing was we were all looking for an engineering solution, right? X representation,
[Guest]: or if you give this community the veto on this issue. And I think Ambedkar called the bluff on
[Guest]: that in his book on Pakistan. He says, boss, if you think of yourself as one nation, two societies,
[Guest]: this is not going to be a power arrangement system between two communities that see themselves as
[Guest]: part of the same nation. And the only way you're going to get that is in some senses,
[Guest]: disembedding individuals, right? And his argument was that the strongest argument for partition is
[Guest]: that it might give India the chance to modernize because it takes the Hindu-Muslim question off
[Guest]: the agenda. He was not entirely sanguine about it, but he thought there was a much greater
[Guest]: possibility of that than if you just locked India into this one question, what is going to be the
[Guest]: balance of power between Hindus and Muslims. And unfortunately, I think since 1857, that
[Guest]: political question has kind of dominated and the BJP now comes and says,
[Guest]: we gave them a veto, we'll make them irrelevant, right? So, in that sense, that project,
[Guest]: which was at the heart of Madisonian democracy, that you cannot make any system of representation
[Guest]: run where fundamentally the purpose of representation is not to create a space
[Guest]: for politics and individuality, but in some senses, to solidify identities. Now,
[Guest]: you need to recognize identity sometimes, right? I mean, so the argument for, let's say,
[Guest]: reservation for Dalits and Ambedkar is clear that the purpose of it is to give them the means and
[Guest]: empower them to actually exercise their agency as individuals. It's not in some senses, just a
[Guest]: mechanical, numerical, you know, question of power sharing. And the final question about power
[Guest]: sharing is that ultimately, it's also about forms of social power, right? And one reason we worry
[Guest]: about this particular moment is, you know, even if the state formally remains constitutional in
[Guest]: the way that it is, and you know, you create forms of social power that stigmatize and marginalize
[Guest]: and marginalize groups and target for them for being who they are, right?
[Guest]: The Nehru project in some ways, right, actually kind of understood that. Now, the problem that
[Guest]: happened in the sense that you don't actually have a vehicle, in some sense for achieving that
[Guest]: objective. I think Gandhi was right on this. What happened to social reform? What happened to public
[Guest]: education, the one crucible in which common citizenship is created around the world, right?
[Guest]: That's pretty much been the most important instrument of any nation state, right? There,
[Guest]: we, the liberals failed, absolutely, utterly, miserably. So, you're kind of operating on a
[Guest]: project that has actually no institutional engines behind it.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and I agree, actually, that my question was a little unfair,
[Amit Varma]: because I made the mistake of comparing proportional representation in theory with
[Amit Varma]: first past, supposed in practice. And if you were to do it the other way around, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the argument could go the other way. And I'm convinced by your argument against proportional
[Amit Varma]: representation, that it embeds those identities in place and doesn't recognize the fact that
[Amit Varma]: every individual contains multitudes. And obviously, we want to move beyond identity.
[Amit Varma]: But then the same argument could also be used for various kinds of affirmative action that we've
[Amit Varma]: gone for, it could be used for, you know, what we did with the Hindu code bill, that you're treating
[Amit Varma]: people of one particular identity in one particular way, and, you know, privileging another one by
[Amit Varma]: leaving them out of it for understandable reasons that we don't want the minorities to feel
[Amit Varma]: uncomfortable, but nevertheless, and this is also a sort of a tension at the heart of the project,
[Amit Varma]: I think, in the sense that you have the constitution guaranteeing equality and that everyone will be
[Amit Varma]: treated equally. But then you have all of these exceptions carved out with perhaps great intentions,
[Amit Varma]: but you have these exceptions carved out. And in this sense, it seems a little incoherent, you know.
[Guest]: So I think you have to distinguish the three cases that you mentioned, because I think they
[Guest]: are very different logics. I mean, you know, to me, the reservation case, particularly for Dalits,
[Guest]: right? What's the theory, right? The theory is, here's a group that is marginalized in on every
[Guest]: single dimension, you can mention, right? Unlike OBCs and all, as you pointed out.
[Guest]: And one instrument of addressing that marginalization has got to be giving a share
[Guest]: in jobs and education. That's, that's, I mean, and partly just because of spinoff effects. I mean,
[Guest]: because this is a group in some senses that was so marginalized, you've never seen a government
[Guest]: officer, right? But the objective, right, is not the maintenance of a group identity, right? The
[Guest]: objective is to put you in a position where you can actually exercise your individual agency like
[Guest]: everybody else does. So when Dalits, you know, and it's not, I think, an accident that, you know,
[Guest]: one of the reasons I think Dalits have been, Dalit movements have been such custodians of the
[Guest]: constitution, not just because of the identification with Ambedkar. But because the story they want is
[Guest]: not a story of, some now are beginning to articulate it after the Mandelson, but it's not a story of
[Guest]: actually just power sharing and representation. It was a story of, in some sense, inclusion as
[Guest]: agents and subjects, for which this happens to be an instrument, right? Now,
[Guest]: there's two things that in a sense that so in principle, you can actually justify, I think,
[Guest]: affirmative action of someone, right? The question then becomes, how do you design it in a way that
[Guest]: actually achieves that particular objective, right? And there we, in a sense, did the kind
[Guest]: of classic thing the Indian state does, lowest common denominator, simplest solution. And partly,
[Guest]: we were politically wedded to it, because we were failing on all the other dimensions of inclusion,
[Guest]: right? So this becomes a kind of lightning rod for mobilization.
[Guest]: With the expansion of Mandal, in some senses, that inclusionary logic of affirmative action
[Guest]: was now, OBCs are complicated groups, I mean, it's a very large category. But broadly speaking,
[Guest]: it actually took the reservation debate into, here is a pie that needs to be divided,
[Guest]: in a sense, according to the identities of people. And now we have the reductio ad absurdum of them,
[Guest]: which is, you know, might as well say, you know, if they're only 5% of our castes, give them 5%
[Guest]: or of that pie, right? And there were better ways of designing affirmative action. I think,
[Guest]: you know, many people propose this. We were pushing for it at the Knowledge Commission
[Guest]: based on Rakesh Basan's work then, which is, what if you used parents education as a proxy
[Guest]: for people who are eligible for affirmative action, it would actually cover all the Dalit
[Guest]: groups you need to cover, right? But in some senses, after a generation or two could be
[Guest]: self-liquidating. Interestingly, JNU's multi-pronged deprivation index was actually
[Guest]: an interesting way of breaking out of this mould, in some ways. And you could, you know, you could,
[Guest]: you could actually tinker with it in ways in which so I actually think affirmative
[Guest]: action is actually quite just but yes, the form in which we congealed it.
[Guest]: And two, I think the cultural change, right, which is what happened the minute this became
[Guest]: a question of just the sharing of power. The ethical dimension of it, which is the point
[Guest]: is that in some senses, you should not be a prisoner of this compulsory identity,
[Guest]: right? That ethical point got lost. And not just got lost. I mean, I was quite aghast,
[Guest]: you know, day before yesterday, Manish Sodhia, you know, yes, the government is hounding him,
[Guest]: but his first response was, I am a Rajput, I don't bow down.
[Guest]: And I mean, I can understand the sentiment, but what's the implication, right? That there is a
[Guest]: kind of compulsory identity of Rajputness. And you know, we slip into that quite,
[Guest]: quite unconsciously, right? That the moral horror of caste, right, is that it gives everyone a
[Guest]: compulsory identity where you have no control over your self-definition. Right? I mean, that's
[Guest]: what makes, you know, parts of Manu like look so kind of oppressive. Why Ambedkar reacts so
[Guest]: strongly to Gandhi, it's not just that Harijan is patronizing. It's the ultimate Manuwadi act
[Guest]: where somebody comes and says, I'm going to name you, right? Right? No matter what you do, where
[Guest]: you are, you're Harijan, right? And one of the reasons I think caste politics is so attractive
[Guest]: to politicians, right? In a way in which class politics is not is because it provides a simple,
[Guest]: simple metric, right? X people have graduated. If you do class, the minute you come out of your
[Guest]: class, you're no longer a member of that class, right? So caste has this peculiar
[Guest]: kind of feature, right? And why I think the caste census, I actually oppose the caste census,
[Guest]: because I think everything that needs to be done for genuine empowerment, you can actually do
[Guest]: without a census, you don't need a census for that. And it's an actually an artifact of this
[Guest]: odd, and we haven't even resolved the methodological question, right? Can it be a part of
[Guest]: self-definition? And if your identity cannot be part of self-definition, or not a product of
[Guest]: self-definition, for the liberal state, that's almost the worst kind of identity, right? You
[Guest]: don't even get the right to name who you are. Right? So I think that's where we ended up, I
[Guest]: think, wrong with the caste question. The personal law question, in some ways, and you're right that
[Guest]: the constitution did a compromise, it was a modus vivendi, it's conditions of partition.
[Guest]: Partly, it's an act of reassurance, right, to minorities.
[Guest]: The way I now think of the personal law question is, I think the question got slightly inframed
[Guest]: in this terms of kind of uniform civil code. Because that, again, reinstates the question,
[Guest]: whose civil code, who's defining it? Whose values get into it? And you know, when you're
[Guest]: looking at things like marriage, right? I mean, I'm just trying to think of common civil code of,
[Guest]: you know, marriage, cross cousin marriage, go through marriage, right? I mean, these are
[Guest]: deeply met practices. The better tact to take, which I think is where the Supreme Court was
[Guest]: incrementally heading, was to say that, look, there can be different kinds of variations,
[Guest]: right? But all of those variations have to pass some basic tests, right? Gender equality,
[Guest]: freedom of a certain kind, compatible with that, if the variation is fine, and plus,
[Guest]: you can have an exit option. I mean, you can always do, you know, the special marriages act,
[Guest]: right? But I think framing the common civil code around national integration was a mistake.
[Guest]: Because it immediately raises the specter, will our cultural practices find a reflection in this
[Guest]: nation? The commonality that we are interested in is the baseline consensus that the state has
[Guest]: a compelling interest in gender equality and freedom across all laws, right? Compatible with
[Guest]: that, if there are, you know, various kinds of variations and all of that, you know, that's
[Guest]: something to be in a sense worked out. But the suspicion, right, that this is going to be drafted
[Guest]: by a majority that's not going to consult others. And by the way, the reverse suspicion where
[Guest]: Congress party's biggest mistake, to institutionally empower a body like the
[Guest]: Muslim Personal Law Board, which is neither representative, nor farsighted, nor has any
[Guest]: imagination, right? Partly, I think, for political reasons, the political reasons being that
[Guest]: it was easier to prey on that politics of fear. The majority will, in some senses,
[Guest]: ride roughshod over you. Now, that's happening anyway. But instead of being constructive about
[Guest]: it, right, and Congress kind of betrayed all of these principles, particularly under Rajiv Gandhi.
[Guest]: So I think that I think, I think for liberals, I think it's important to engage with the UCC debate,
[Guest]: not just to a knee-jerk reaction, but bring it back to these first principles, right?
[Guest]: What's the compelling core vision of the constitution that these practices in some
[Guest]: senses have to and then, you know, then some senses apply that, I think, you know, symmetrically,
[Guest]: you know, in some ways. I think on liberty, I actually agree with you where the two kinds
[Guest]: of threats of liberty where, again, the Indian state not is not an exception. One is the kind
[Guest]: of inflation of threats to national security and public order as pretext for containing curtailing
[Guest]: civil rights, which again, all states have done. But the second, I am a near absolutist in free
[Guest]: speech, unless there's direct incitement to violence. I think the presence of a category
[Guest]: that looks like blasphemy, right, if it's an operational category in law, I mean,
[Guest]: you have states like England, where it existed in the books, but you know,
[Guest]: nobody bothered for it for quite a while, is actually a disaster for liberal societies.
[Guest]: And it's a disaster in two ways. One, because it suggests the kind of basic lack of trust,
[Guest]: which is the underlying discourse of that article, right? We are such mad people,
[Guest]: we will get so triggered, right, that large scale violence is going to follow.
[Guest]: But we fail to consider the reverse possibility that large scale violence,
[Guest]: right, once you also follows from the fact that people can actually mobilize to get things banned,
[Guest]: and then it becomes a competitive race between communities. So I think a very,
[Guest]: very strong norm, right? And why, for instance, in the Nupur Sharma case,
[Guest]: I think it was important to say that as a functionary of the BJP, right,
[Guest]: the manner of articulation should not suggest that minorities are stigmatized and arguments
[Guest]: about my mother weaponized in that way. But I actually don't think there's a case for arresting
[Guest]: her. I think that's where, again, we liberals jump right into the trap. Right? So you reach
[Guest]: a point where these kinds of utterances become a kind of matter of fact where, you know,
[Guest]: somebody says, nobody actually pays attention to them. But by having a law, you are ensuring,
[Guest]: right, that, you know, these get rid. By the way, this is not just true with this. I mean,
[Guest]: you just look at what's happening in Punjab. I mean, Punjab has a blasphemy law, the SGPCs
[Guest]: is cracked down in some senses of even legitimate scholars who work on Sikhism
[Guest]: is actually a story that's not been written about enough. So there's all these kind of
[Guest]: reverberating effects, Basaveshra's followers in Karnataka, right? So we just I think,
[Guest]: I think we need to, in some senses, I think, show more trust. It's not going to be seamless.
[Guest]: But we have locked ourselves into a vicious cycle, which is only, I think, deepened
[Guest]: with every, again, you know, being stuck in a 1930s paradigm.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I agree with you on all of this. And you said you're a near free speech absolutist
[Amit Varma]: and you're near me because I'm an absolutist. And I agree with you about the liberal hypocrisy
[Amit Varma]: about this. I mean, you know, if you think 295A and 153A are bad, they should not be there,
[Amit Varma]: they should not be there, then that's it. That's the end of the story. But you can't say that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: you know, don't use it on us, but use it for Annab Goswami, use it for Nupur Sharma that
[Amit Varma]: simply does not compute and just tremendous. No, I said near absolute, just in the sense that,
[Guest]: you know, absolute has a kind of connotation where, you know, even normal taught wrongs
[Guest]: are not actually covered by that. So, you know, but I suspect on every issue, we'll be all probably
[Amit Varma]: on the same on free speech. No, and I'm exactly with you on the issue of reservations as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the objectives and the rationale behind reservations for Dalits were fantastic. But if you
[Amit Varma]: look at the outcomes and the way they turned out, you know, I agree with you about the design. But
[Amit Varma]: the thing is that tool became a political tool eventually. And I wonder if it ended up solidifying
[Amit Varma]: these identities in people minds like caste is incredibly toxic it is and what you want to do
[Amit Varma]: is you want to fight as effectively as you can. And I think part of the danger was part of the
[Amit Varma]: danger of any kind of top down thinking is that up in a law banalia and the law is there and you
[Amit Varma]: think our job is done, it's over. But the point is a top down law is going to be incredibly ineffective
[Amit Varma]: and be you know, then that social change simply isn't happening. We needed that social change
[Amit Varma]: and I wonder if our thinking about it was and it's easy to say this in hindsight, obviously.
[Guest]: No, but I think a couple of nuances I think on reservation for Dalits, I think I have a slightly
[Guest]: different, it's not incompatible, but I think one nuance, you know, when we say solidified caste,
[Guest]: I think we actually have to acknowledge the fact that a lot of that solidification actually comes
[Guest]: from upper caste backlash that refuses to acknowledge this reality. Actually, it's not
[Guest]: as much as if Dalits kind of, you know, yes, for political sense, but in some ways, I think,
[Guest]: I actually do think there's a kind of asymmetry there, at least what I see on college campuses,
[Guest]: in some ways, I mean, obviously, in India, you can't escape caste, but I think
[Guest]: the solidification that has come from the resentment that I have to deal with this
[Guest]: problem, I think that's actually, and it's a much more insidious form of solidification
[Guest]: than a traditional and I think it has to be said that I think a lot of the mechanism of
[Guest]: solidification, like in the US, in some senses, solidification of white identity actually comes
[Guest]: from that. We don't want to share this power or innocence, share this space. I think the second
[Guest]: thing, I think, in the case of Dalit reservations is that, you know, it has at the margins, I think,
[Guest]: created avenues for mobility, which are beginning to have backchannel effects. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: I think if our friend Chandraban was here, he has a particular take on this in some ways, right,
[Guest]: which is that, in the case of Dalits, you urgently needed to create even the minimal resources,
[Guest]: educational, to actually even think of the slightest forms of mobility, right. So, right.
[Guest]: And you could argue that some of that has actually happened in some ways that, you know, in some
[Guest]: senses, even the Dalit entrepreneurs that he's writing about, right. And many of them, by the
[Guest]: way, don't want reservation for themselves and their kids. And there is, you know, so in that
[Guest]: sense, I don't think for them, it's this kind of solidified story. But the fact that there were
[Guest]: examples and the fact that this is, I think, an enabling step. I think the scandal, I think,
[Guest]: of reservations is that, and this I can say, you know, very apparent when I was on the Knowledge
[Guest]: Commission. Absolutely everybody in India gets mobilized on the issue of access, low fees,
[Guest]: you know, affirmative action, impossible to get anybody mobilized on education quality.
[Guest]: And access to us became that substitute for, you know, quality in some ways, right. And as time
[Guest]: went on, so more and more weight was actually placed on the access story. You know, in that
[Guest]: we are achieving quality is a kind of miracle, you know, in the sense that lots of little nooks and
[Guest]: crannies allowed us escape all. But the quality story, and the quality story was, in fact, you
[Guest]: know, often used against Dalits, right? I mean, this whole question of, you know, they're not
[Guest]: enough qualified Dalits. I mean, frankly, in our context, if you're sincere about that,
[Guest]: you first have to show what your record is on improving public schools, improving the quality
[Guest]: of education. Otherwise, that's just a weapon to basically argue for the unfairness of reservation.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, you know, pitting the plumage but forgetting the dying bird.
[Amit Varma]: It's a circular argument that traps them in a vicious circle. I agree about that. But what I
[Amit Varma]: meant by solidifying identity was not in the case of Dalits per se, but what reservations later
[Amit Varma]: became when it got expanded to various landowning costs, and so on and so forth, where it just
[Amit Varma]: became, you know, one more tool that you use in electoral politics to build vote banks, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. And, you know, but actually, it's deeper than that. I mean, I think you're right
[Guest]: about it, because what I've been actually struck by, you know, so there's this nice sociological
[Guest]: story, we told ourselves that caste will move from hierarchy to identity, right? And in some senses,
[Guest]: that's really an achievement, because it takes away from the hierarchical purity pollution aspects.
[Guest]: It's a way of organizing group identity. I think the horror to my mind of that story,
[Guest]: the way it has happened in India is, in a sense, the compulsory character of it.
[Guest]: That the kinds of identities that liberal society values and values should valorize
[Guest]: the freedom for people to, in some senses, choose and create identities.
[Guest]: But the kind of identities that we have created, its compulsory character,
[Guest]: right, which is, which is, in a sense, your measure, no matter it kind of all parts of the
[Guest]: spectrum, right. And that now has even more insidious form, right? It's been given legal
[Guest]: form in some ways, right? I mean, it's, it's, it's, it's a, and how you can create a liberal
[Guest]: society that doesn't open up the possibility of self-definition, I think, is, is, should worry us.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, so here's a question. And here's a thought that kind of gives me some amount of despair,
[Amit Varma]: which is we have all these fault lines in Indian society, right? It was almost a matter of faith
[Amit Varma]: at one point for our liberal elites that look, number one, we will, you know, create these
[Amit Varma]: top-down interventions to solve these problems. And number two, society will modernize over time,
[Amit Varma]: we'll get prosperous, things will get better, these fissures will disappear. Now, what we see
[Amit Varma]: with the anti-Muslim nature of modern politics, which more than one party subscribes to,
[Amit Varma]: is that that really hasn't happened. If anything, they've kind of deepened. We see the same thing
[Amit Varma]: with caste, we see more assertion of it, like, so somebody is standing up and saying he's a
[Amit Varma]: Rajput, and so on and so forth. You know, that's, if anything, it's, it's sort of become stronger.
[Amit Varma]: So where does progress then come from?
[Guest]: I mean, in the longer sweep, I think the story is a bit more mixed. And let me take one, begin
[Guest]: with a different example, because it might have some bearing on actually these two as well, which
[Guest]: is, you know, the one piece of good news that has come in the last week or so, which is India's
[Guest]: India is inching back towards a normal sex ratio at birth, right? I know India's female
[Guest]: labour force participation is abysmally low. But I actually think in 10 years, the story will be
[Guest]: very different. I mean, I mean, you can almost sense the pressure of social change. You just
[Guest]: look at any educational institution, you just look at that, you know, this kind of stuff,
[Guest]: it's taking longer than it should. And often, you know, the lag between enrolment and participation
[Guest]: is 15 to 10 to 15 years, partly because maybe people are investing in their children. So,
[Guest]: so it's actually a good example, right? And one can be kind of cynical about it. But I actually
[Guest]: saw in Haryana, you know, one of the most kind of patriarchal states in some ways, a kind of
[Guest]: poster child. The beti bachao, beti padhao was not insincere across social and political spectrums.
[Guest]: That doesn't mean violence is stopped. That doesn't mean honour killings are not going to
[Guest]: happen. That doesn't mean you know, but so here's a kind of interesting example of actually a
[Guest]: pretty deep and significant long term change that in some senses, I think, churning.
[Guest]: Right. I think with caste, right. So you could tell a kind of benign story,
[Guest]: which would go something like this, that again, what we are seeing at the moment
[Guest]: is the lag between that political paradigm we had for the last 20-30 years and the actual
[Guest]: social changes. So two things are already beginning, three things in the caste politics,
[Guest]: right? One, the logic of caste now is de-agglomeration, right, which is already
[Guest]: a kind of acknowledgement that that paradigm of classification didn't quite work. So now you have
[Guest]: to have EBCs, now you have to add other criteria. So it's a kind of splintering of caste.
[Guest]: Two, you're beginning to see a lot more splintering of voting choices, right? I mean,
[Guest]: as much as you and I might hate Dalit groups voting for the BJP, at another level, it actually
[Guest]: does signify something deep, right? Not just the fact that they think the BJP is not an obstacle,
[Guest]: even if it's not, you know, fully empowering, but the identification between caste and party. Now,
[Guest]: it still exists. I mean, you know, UP upper caste will predominantly 80% penetration of the BJP and
[Guest]: stuff. But I actually think the voting story is a lot more fluid and will get fluid. And now again,
[Guest]: it's endogenous. I mean, it's endogenous in the sense that if there's a plausible alternative
[Guest]: coalition, people gravitate to it. If there's nothing on offer, then caste is a kind of default
[Guest]: thing. I mean, if I know you're not, nobody's going to give me governance, I might as well get,
[Guest]: you know, three of my buddies in government or something, right? And the shifting coalitions,
[Guest]: in a sense around caste, right? So I think, I think that's, I think, I think a little bit in
[Guest]: the sense of opening up. And the third thing, in a sense that that will happen, right, which is,
[Guest]: you know, a lot of the articulation of the kind of liberal ideas, not the practice of liberalism,
[Guest]: but ideas. It is historically required a kind of much bigger middle class, right? Now, up till now,
[Guest]: most of us did not have to face this question, because other than in education institutions,
[Guest]: because of reservation, we actually never actually had to encounter the question of sharing same
[Guest]: spaces and all of that. And the fact that the focus is getting back on to things like discrimination
[Guest]: and stuff, it may actually force a kind of different kind of conversation. Generationally,
[Guest]: it may force a different kind of conversation, where you hope, I mean, let's see, does even
[Guest]: politically, Tejasvi, do Tejasvi and Akhilesh, think of caste and politics somewhat differently,
[Guest]: they're not going to give up on the caste story, right? But it's no longer that, you know,
[Guest]: caste, dignity, or nothing else, program that Lalu ran on. So I actually think there are kind of
[Guest]: exogenous changes. And I think on this Chandrabhan is right, this is the more economic churn you
[Guest]: create, it opens up different possibilities. I'm not saying, I'm not an economic determinist,
[Guest]: we know from the US experience, that, you know, categories like race and caste can be very,
[Guest]: very sticky. But for years, you just didn't even have the basic raw material,
[Guest]: to which to, in some senses, reconfigure all of this. So I suspect, you know, this is one place
[Guest]: where you might get more progress. The Hindu Muslim thing, frankly, gives me the nightmares.
[Guest]: It gives me the nightmares, because I see its normative entrenchment, like, so with caste,
[Guest]: for all the, you know, social practices about caste, nobody kind of normatively defends,
[Guest]: you know, we should return to caste society or something. Well, it's communalism, we do,
[Guest]: I mean, that, you know, you can, so its normative entrenchment is much deeper.
[Guest]: The kind of political narrative of fear that you need to sustain an anti-Muslim political outlook,
[Guest]: that kind of material is very readily available. I mean, it takes one blasphemy incident. And,
[Guest]: you know, we can talk about the short term victory of, you know, BJP having to expel three MLAs.
[Guest]: Trust me, this is going to be an underground resentment, right?
[Guest]: You have, in some sense, it's Pakistan, right? So,
[Guest]: the objective conditions where Hindu nationalism creates a kind of climate of fear,
[Guest]: magnifies what is actually not really as big a threat, right? Those conditions are actually
[Guest]: more likely to obtain now in some ways, right? So, there's enough fodder for them, as it were,
[Guest]: right? I think, in a way. Third thing in some ways, right, which is that, and this is where the
[Guest]: question of power sharing with Muslims has always been complicated in the Indian context,
[Guest]: that there's often a convergence between a certain kind of liberal and Hindu nationalism,
[Guest]: right? I mean, Lala Lajpat Rai was actually as good a liberal as you can get in many respects,
[Guest]: right? But the narrative of both, the construction of a Muslim otherness,
[Guest]: where you say, look, there's something about this community that is going to make them
[Guest]: more resistant to liberal norms than anybody else. Now, I actually don't believe that construction.
[Guest]: I don't believe that construction. But the over determination of the ideological sources from
[Guest]: which people come, I think, makes it a harder problem to deal with, which is why I think it's
[Guest]: important for liberals to get their first principles right on this, you know, because
[Guest]: the pseudo secularism charge, right, is something that we need to diffuse, I think, by our conduct.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, as you rightly said, no political party is going to do it for us. I mean,
[Guest]: that's the real danger part where you, for the first time since independence, you do not have
[Guest]: a single political party that can, even on basic empathy grounds, say, in a civilized society,
[Guest]: it's our job to make sure that nobody is targeted for being who they are.
[Guest]: First time, no political, I actually, I'm even beginning to doubt whether TMC will do this
[Amit Varma]: in the near future. Yeah, it's tragic. I should point out to listeners that since you've referred
[Amit Varma]: to recent events, we will be recording this on August 24, it will come out a bit later. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just to keep that in mind, I did, by the way, invite Chandrabhan Prasad to the show
[Amit Varma]: during this trip. But the moment he heard I wanted five hours of his time, he was just very firm. He
[Amit Varma]: said, No, sir, please excuse leave me out of it. And I was like, it'd be fun. He's fun. If you can,
[Amit Varma]: I would really appreciate it. Because that's one episode I really, really want to do. But
[Amit Varma]: regardless of whether he comes on the show or not, I'd urge all my listeners to read his books and
[Amit Varma]: read his writing. A great thinker. And yeah, and you know, the thing to note about caste,
[Amit Varma]: which I keep thinking about and which I think elite discourse misses is that more Dalits voted
[Amit Varma]: for BJP in 2014 and 2019 than for any other party, you know, and and that's a revealed preference.
[Amit Varma]: So there's clearly something happening there, which is sort of interesting. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the anti Muslim stuff, it leaves me speechless. And what especially worries me is the inevitable
[Amit Varma]: consequence of what you wrote about as a BJP is long term strategy, which you termed heads weave
[Amit Varma]: and tails you lose. And the point there was that you do all this macho anti Muslim posturing,
[Amit Varma]: you're getting brownie points from your people. But the moment there is any backlash,
[Amit Varma]: you can use that to claim victimhood. And you can then, you know, double down on that.
[Amit Varma]: And that worries me enormously. It you know, so far, the Muslims of India and I hate to speak
[Amit Varma]: of anyone in a collective sense, but so far, the Muslims of India have been incredibly tolerant and
[Amit Varma]: graceful in the face of an incredible amount of provocation. But it just takes one random guy,
[Amit Varma]: breaking down not being able to do, you know, take it anymore and doing something rash.
[Amit Varma]: And then a video of that can just go all over WhatsApp. And you know, that can be the spark
[Amit Varma]: and you can light the fire. And that scares me a lot to the extent that that is not in anybody's
[Amit Varma]: control anymore. It is not as if the Prime Minister was to decide that this must not happen.
[Amit Varma]: Well, sorry, he doesn't control this anymore. He can't ride this tiger.
[Guest]: So there's two things about that. I'll point slightly differently. That is actually the
[Guest]: thing that gives me nightmares. I actually do think by the way, I still believe that
[Guest]: when this Indian state wants to control stuff, it can, it actually can. I mean, it's, you know,
[Guest]: which is why we've kind of, I mean, there's almost no right that doesn't happen without
[Guest]: some kind of active state abdication or participation. I mean, it's not that it can
[Guest]: kind of, you know, it can stop it from alter, but it can actually, you know, limit its impact and
[Guest]: limit its scope, right. But the worrying thing is precisely that it doesn't look like the ruling
[Guest]: dispensation will have an incentive to do that. That's one, or if it is an incentive,
[Guest]: it will be a very tactical one for a particular context. But the second thing that's worrying me,
[Guest]: right, and that's the larger context of our democracy, where, you know, this is also happening
[Guest]: at a time where you both have a greater institutionalization of this kind of
[Guest]: of this kind of communalism in different branches of the state as a very active state project. I
[Guest]: mean, a kind of unconscious half-baked communalism is always part of the state,
[Guest]: in some states more than others. But I'm less and less confident now that you can trust the
[Guest]: key organs of the state where if the signal was right, they would actually do the right thing.
[Guest]: I mean, I think in that sense, there's a kind of longer term, you know, whether it's judges,
[Guest]: whether it's bureaucrats, possibly people even said they're just the armed forces, right? So,
[Guest]: it gives you a very different kind of institutional power, right? That's, I think, one thing.
[Guest]: The second thing, I think, is that, you know, given the way with which
[Guest]: the government is going after the opposition now. So, if you ask the question about democracy,
[Guest]: and as much as we decry professional politicians,
[Guest]: every democracy is sustained by professional politicians. And by professional politicians,
[Guest]: we mean a couple of things, a group of people who understand themselves to be members of a
[Guest]: political class and acknowledge each other as members of a political class
[Guest]: and play by a certain kind of certain rules of the game. Now, that can have its downsides. I mean,
[Guest]: one of the downsides was, for example, you do not prosecute anybody in politics. We always used to
[Guest]: say politicians get away scot-free. But in a way, that was part of that mutual reciprocity.
[Guest]: If you look at the breakdown of democracies, once you have a hyper-ideological regime in power,
[Guest]: and it has, in a sense, broken that professional norm, right?
[Guest]: One should not assume that it will give up power easily, even if you think you can actually get it
[Guest]: to lose in an election, right? Because you've already created this deep state apparatus,
[Guest]: right? Which will allow, I mean, some will be opportunistic, some will shift. But surely,
[Guest]: I think, given what India has gone through the last seven or eight years, it will allow
[Guest]: the ruling establishment to do the same. If you were part of that establishment,
[Guest]: you cannot now assume it's one IAS officer, another IAS officer, we just rotate like we used to,
[Guest]: right? The kind of prosecution the ruling establishment would fear,
[Guest]: if there's a genuine opposition victory, right? You could argue that that substantially reduces
[Guest]: their investment in acquiescing to a peaceful transition of power. And I think this is a
[Guest]: danger that we are facing for the first time in Indian democracy. And it's hard to kind of
[Guest]: articulate it, because we haven't had a past kind of precedence. I mean, you could argue emergency
[Guest]: 75. But all the signs are the ruling dispensation is putting itself in a position where it will be
[Guest]: very difficult for its carders, its party, its leadership, to actually accept a peaceful
[Guest]: transition of power. So you may be in a position where mere electoral dissatisfaction, unless it's
[Guest]: like some massive thing that, you know, you kind of just really scare them. But even if it's a
[Guest]: close election, we've already seen that in the US, right? I mean, the legitimacy of the election
[Guest]: impugned. That's a very distinctive possibility in India now. The German political theorist,
[Amit Varma]: Carl Schmitt, once said that in politics, you need an other, right? What we are seeing in India,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense is, of course, Muslims are the other, that's something playing out at the social level.
[Amit Varma]: But in politics, the BJP has pretty much, you know, it's virtually created a Congress
[Amit Varma]: Mugbharat as it wish to and there's practically no opposition. So there is a sense and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I've seen traces of it in the rabbit holes, I've gone down on the extreme right wing rabbit holes,
[Amit Varma]: that the opposition will really come from within, like already we speak about the fault lines
[Amit Varma]: between Trads and Raitas as they are called, you know, Trads being the completely traditional
[Amit Varma]: hug back to good old Hinduism, whatever that was, and so on and so forth. Do you have the sense that
[Amit Varma]: it could play out that way that the splintering will happen from within that, you know, rather
[Amit Varma]: than from without because without there really is not much of an opposition right now?
[Guest]: I'm less convinced that you'll get the splintering. One again, maybe we are too close to the present
[Guest]: moment, but and maybe this is acknowledging your point about how we see the importance of
[Guest]: ideology here, as opposed to what people fear most. It's like the Republican Party in the US,
[Guest]: nobody defected, right? You would have thought Trump was anti-evangelical. So this Trads and
[Guest]: Raitas thing is a Twitter discourse, honestly, politically is useless. I think as a kind of
[Guest]: articulation of a possible political movement, you know, somebody saying this is not traditional
[Guest]: Hinduism, this is, you know, some violent, aggressive, non-traditional revolutionary
[Guest]: doctrine, right? A, I don't think that's going to happen. B, I think it's a bit it's early days.
[Guest]: Remember, yes, human nature is ambitious. But the BJP's had longer socialization mechanisms
[Guest]: than I think almost, it's the kind of socialized message and mechanism that the Congress Party did,
[Guest]: right? Where you could argue, I mean, look, do the counterfactual if Patel and Nehru had split,
[Guest]: literally split. Or if Nehru had gone with Subash and split with Gandhi,
[Guest]: an international movement could have collapsed. I actually still think if you look at the cast
[Guest]: of characters, I mean, whatever their other faults, their ambitions will certainly come into play.
[Guest]: But, and there will be differences. But I think it's too premature to conclude that this is just
[Guest]: going to be another like factional fight. The third thing I think about that, which is
[Guest]: there's just a speculative possibility, which is, suppose there were to be a split.
[Guest]: Does the process of creating that split actually radicalize the party even more and make it worse?
[Guest]: Because we know, I mean, this is often the case with extremist organizations, right? The way
[Guest]: you claim your legitimacy is by outflanking whatever slivers of moderation you might have,
[Guest]: right? That gives other parties an opening, but it doesn't necessarily actually mean that the
[Guest]: outcome of that splintering is actually less violent or any good. And this is true of any
[Guest]: religious base. I mean, you can look at the Akalis, you can look at, you know, that the
[Guest]: splintering, because it'll have to legitimize itself. And if you're in the BJP, the only way
[Guest]: you legitimize yourself is by saying, you know, humne hindu to agenda poora nahi kiya,
[Amit Varma]: No, that move to the extremes is what I worry about in the sense that it's an inevitable
[Amit Varma]: logic of modern politics. I think that the way you stand out in your own party is by,
[Amit Varma]: you know, being purer than the purest. And to my mind, those horrific videos that emerged
[Amit Varma]: of that dharam sansad where you had a bunch of leaders. And to me, that was competitive,
[Amit Varma]: that was that was bound, they were all bound to be so extreme, because they were competing with
[Amit Varma]: each other. Had it been one guy on a stage, he might have said something a little less mad,
[Amit Varma]: you know, still would have been objectionable, but a little less mad, but they competed with
[Amit Varma]: each other. And the worry is that that kind of continues. And by the way, among the Republicans,
[Amit Varma]: Justin Amash did leave, but yeah, outlier who proves you know, the exception that proves the
[Amit Varma]: rule, I guess, in a sense, you know, I think I've held you long enough. So we can, you know,
[Amit Varma]: move away to more general questions, and then something more pleasant. And my big general
[Amit Varma]: question here is multifold, which is about engaging with reality, something that you've
[Amit Varma]: kind of referred to how in politics, the rules of the game have also sort of changed. And I look at
[Amit Varma]: different sort of ecosystems, and how they engage with reality. And one, I see the academic
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem, where I find that there is this massive academic circle jerk, where academics are talking
[Amit Varma]: to each other, and they are kind of trapped in that loop. And there are certain fashionable
[Amit Varma]: prisms which have to be adopted. Otherwise, you're not getting your papers published or not
[Amit Varma]: getting tenure. And more and more, I see the academic world, especially in the humanities,
[Amit Varma]: as something that is in a parallel universe and has lost all connection to the real world. And
[Amit Varma]: nobody takes him seriously and rightly so. I mean, individuals, of course, produce important work,
[Amit Varma]: but otherwise, then I look at politics, and politics also in India, politicians don't bother
[Amit Varma]: to engage with reality in that sense, because, you know, our politicians have figured out that
[Amit Varma]: narratives matter, governance doesn't. And in any case, their core skill when they get to power is
[Amit Varma]: building narratives, that's how they get to power. Governance is not necessarily a core skill, you
[Amit Varma]: can, you know, when you take over the state, you can let inertia continue, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And there also engagement with reality is not so critical. You know, as far as the media is
[Amit Varma]: concerned, mainstream media is pretty much irrelevant, that we no longer have a consensus
[Amit Varma]: on the truth. It's narrative battles everywhere. As far as individuals are concerned, I think,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is that famous quote from Kashi Kasi, where Kashi Nath Singh says,
[Amit Varma]: ki bhar mein jaye duniya, hum bhajaye harmoniya, right, which is, sometimes I feel that I should
[Amit Varma]: just adopt that and live by that. And I think many people, whatever they do, they, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they do despite the state, they're like, I got to get by how I got to get by, I don't really care.
[Amit Varma]: And plus, you know, rational ignorance kicks in, why waste time, when your one vote won't make so
[Amit Varma]: much of a difference. And the market engages with reality to the limited extent that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you make money by fulfilling people's desires. So you want to know what they are, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. This then just becomes an issue that, you know, reality is not in question. And all of this,
[Amit Varma]: it's it's narrative games, narrative battles. You know, many great intellectuals are wasted
[Amit Varma]: in different ecosystems where they are of no consequence, like the academic
[Amit Varma]: world, for example. So what is your sense of all of this? Or am I being too pessimistic,
[Guest]: as is mostly the case? I mean, these days you want to say, you know,
[Guest]: there's no such thing as being too pessimistic on this road. But I think I broadly agree with you.
[Guest]: See, I think I have a slightly different take on the academic story. I actually don't think
[Guest]: academics are meant to be consequential. And I think if academics play for consequence,
[Guest]: they actually betray their profession. Because we are precisely supposed to be the conditionality of
[Guest]: reflective stuff. And my worry about a lot of academics is not that they're not influential,
[Guest]: or they're irrelevant, is that in the way in which that we have now set our protocols,
[Guest]: even inside the academy, we are actually betraying our vocation. So I actually,
[Guest]: I mean, it is meant to be an ivory tower, precisely for a reason. No, I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that I agree that academics aren't meant to pursue change, but they are meant to
[Guest]: pursue truth. And more importantly, right, they are being letting themselves being used as a kind
[Guest]: of lighting rod. I mean, that's the worst part, right? Now, but here, I think I would distinguish
[Guest]: between two kinds of politicisation. So look, one, like with any organisation, there's a kind
[Guest]: of institutional pathology, and particularly a lot of the stuff that you talked about,
[Guest]: you know, building empires, patronage, creating particular paradigms. You know, these are
[Guest]: actually all straightforward power grabs within the academia. They start off with good intention,
[Guest]: but every paradigm wants to perpetuate itself, right? The second thing, I think, is,
[Guest]: I think this argument about the political views of academics. And there, I actually think the
[Guest]: story is a little bit more exaggerated, because you will, of course, expect academics to be at,
[Guest]: in a sense, the frontier of, you know, and if you look at the kinds of things that people are
[Guest]: objecting to, that academics are doing, particularly in the US, I think the bad faith of the objectors
[Guest]: is as much clear as anything else. I mean, you know, I have my problems with critical race theory,
[Guest]: but like anything, it had a kind of core insight, which you know, now you want to say, you know,
[Guest]: you just can't even in some sense, right? There's a particular crisis specific to the humanities
[Guest]: and disciplines like history. And I don't think that crisis is solvable. We used to manage the
[Guest]: crisis by basically saying the political stakes in this should not be high. So let the 16, 19,
[Guest]: 1776 project duke it out. Let Romila Thapar and Sitaram Goyal duke it out on medieval history,
[Guest]: you know, we'll see that R.C. Majumdar, right? The problem, in a sense, is the insertion of a
[Guest]: national identity in discourse that actually says our ground is that history. Now, once that happens,
[Guest]: it both distorts the history and in a sense, the stakes, because you know, and I think to that
[Guest]: extent, that has kind of changed. I mean, I think, I, you know, I'm feeling kind of nostalgic,
[Guest]: JNU has a lot to answer for. I mean, JNU's, you know, academic practices were in some senses
[Guest]: deeply exclusionary. But you know, in the 70s, right, the big exclusions were, you know,
[Guest]: or 80s subaltern studies, and CPI historians are not genuine historians, it was not the right wing.
[Guest]: I mean, it actually, you know, it's, you know, so I'd have colleagues would say Shahid Amin is
[Guest]: not a real historian, you know, you're like scratching your head. I mean, you know, it's a
[Guest]: so there was a certain kind of, I think, I think, pettiness and academic, I think,
[Guest]: patronage story there. But I don't think the crisis of the history profession
[Guest]: is going to be solved so long as you have a politics governed by nationalism.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, I think history is also set it as a self of the problem, because most modern
[Guest]: historiography was done in the service of the nation state in, you know, in, you know, in some
[Guest]: ways. And so until we reach a point where the social contact is look, it doesn't matter, right,
[Guest]: whether Babur demolished a mosque or not, at least not to the project that we want to salvage now,
[Guest]: I don't think you're going to get through the crisis of history. And unfortunately, historians,
[Guest]: because in a way, it increases their importance fall right into the trap. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: they want to actually argue on those grounds. You just, you know, I mean, who knows if tomorrow,
[Guest]: a new document is discovered, do we completely change the modern Indian project and it justifies,
[Guest]: you know, so I think the crisis of history because of its close connection to the nation state,
[Guest]: I think is a particular one. I think the crisis of disciplines like economics and stuff is, I think,
[Guest]: much more methodological hubris in some ways, I think, again, forgetting the conditionality of
[Guest]: your own, you know, own thinking. Politicians, I disagree with you a little bit. Even now,
[Guest]: there's a fair degree of engagement with reality. I mean, the narrative part comes in, because
[Guest]: that's a way of kind of coping with what this is. So when you can't build a coalition next,
[Guest]: you build it on why, right? But there is still something about the culture of politics that
[Guest]: actually forces. And even with the BJP government, I mean, you know, for the remarkable thing is,
[Guest]: how it feels it needs to respond. You know, RSS farmers are upset, you know,
[Guest]: it could be for purely tactical reasons, right? The sootboot ki sarkar jayi,
[Guest]: I mean, a larger scheme of things seem like a little political triviality,
[Guest]: but what it meant, in a sense, some senses to project. So I think with them, the issue is not
[Guest]: that they're in touch with reality, it's whether they have the imagination and are willing to
[Guest]: expend whatever political capital they have to actually, as you said, create those structures
[Guest]: of governance, and in some areas they will and some areas they won't. I mean, I think the one
[Guest]: I think thing we are interestingly missing, I think, about the Indian state, and I have a
[Guest]: slight disagreement with my friend Karthik on this, where, you know, we've got used to this
[Guest]: very simple narrative of the public as a failure, and the private as a kind of redemption.
[Guest]: You know, for a lot of people, beginning with UPA1 is for the first time they're actually
[Guest]: experiencing state capacity. I mean, think of infrastructure, for example, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, we are a completely different page, right? Now, the surveillance things and stuff
[Guest]: worries me, but the digital stuff is an expression of state capacity in some ways, right? And
[Guest]: what we have been, in a sense, being able to do on scale, in lots of different ways, is
[Guest]: that so I think it's a little bit unfair to say that what politicians are not doing our governance.
[Guest]: So, in my senses, they're finite. I think every government in India now, every state government
[Guest]: does two things well, because that's the ambit of its capability. That's right, it decides what to
[Guest]: do. Arvind Kejriwal decided health and education. Many would argue about infrastructure in Delhi,
[Guest]: right, whether the roads and stuff are. So, I actually think the politicians are actually quite
[Guest]: capable of building out state capacity. I think what we did with, I think what we're doing with
[Guest]: food distribution, right? I mean, for all the limitations, and there are exclusions,
[Guest]: the debate on where PDS and the distribution of food now is very, very different from 20 years
[Guest]: ago. Cash transfers, now you can agree or disagree with cash transfers, whether they're
[Guest]: freebies or productives or not. But the fact that you can actually pull off what you're pulling off
[Guest]: on scale. So, I think the politicians are actually interested in reality. I think
[Guest]: their just conception of it, I think, differs a little bit slightly from ours. And I think the
[Guest]: care, I think, which we have to take, you know, is that at the end of the day,
[Guest]: but the public wants results, I think it's less interested in the public private thing.
[Guest]: And most of the politicians, I think, of this generation have grasped the importance of state
[Guest]: capacity. Now, they'll use it for nefarious ends. There are political constraints. I mean,
[Guest]: if you want to centralise power, sometimes that can detract from a certain kind of state capacity.
[Guest]: But, you know, I think we underestimate how much expansion of state capacity is actually
[Guest]: happening in India, in some ways. I don't think that narrative, I mean, even of teacher absenteeism,
[Guest]: actually, the government school thing has had ripple effects everywhere. I mean, look at the
[Guest]: transfer system in Haryana now, right? This kind of semi automated system, which Arvind Kejriwal
[Guest]: now wants to take to Gujarat, you know, everybody give your first preferences, they'll have an
[Guest]: algorithm sorting out. Actually, it was quite a big deal. I mean, the hundreds of people used
[Guest]: to line outside Chandigarh for transfers. I'm sure that the margin sum of that stuff is still
[Guest]: happening. So I actually do think in that sense, politicians and what actually makes them dangerous
[Guest]: is precisely that. I mean, if it were pure narrative, I think we just explored beyond the
[Guest]: point. I mean, you know, you cannot fool all the people all the time, right? Is that I think they
[Guest]: are actually much more attuned to this stuff than I think a lot of us academics are actually,
[Guest]: in some ways. And they've figured out a social contract within their political imagination.
[Guest]: Everybody's asking the question, you know, why isn't inflation generating more political
[Guest]: resistance? Actually, maybe it's because compared to the 70s, because that's our benchmark, right?
[Guest]: 80s and 70s. Maybe for certain sections, there's actually less volatility in basic access to food
[Guest]: than was the case in the 70s and 80s. So yes, inflation is an issue, milk and vegetables and
[Guest]: petrol prices are an issue. But it's not an issue in the same way that let's say flour and wheat
[Guest]: might have been, you know, 25-30 years ago. So one of the reasons we always lose against
[Guest]: politicians is they are actually more circumscribed by reality than we are.
[Guest]: Yes, the media, the public sphere, absolutely. I mean, and it actually goes back to the
[Guest]: fundamental problem, right, which is both the commercial incentives, if you are really in the
[Guest]: world as you know, this example you gave that a certain kind of post will go viral and get you
[Guest]: more revenue. And you are in a regulatory world where pretty much most of the media is now supply
[Guest]: side media. I mean, I don't think Mr. Narani is going to make money off NDTV. That's not the point.
[Guest]: Most channels don't make money, right? You actually have an architectural problem, which is,
[Guest]: you know, what are the avenues through which voices get amplified? Now, having said that,
[Guest]: I actually think in certain sections of the media, I think the Hindi press,
[Guest]: certain parts of the Hindi press, which I read, I actually don't think it's a structural problem.
[Guest]: These are genuine media houses, but they have become genuinely committed to this political
[Guest]: project. I think they'll think of the Dharani Jagran, for example. You know that and it's a
[Guest]: kind of indication of that institutionalization of, I don't think it's just because there's
[Guest]: pressure. They are actually real believers in this stuff. Yeah, I mean, there are plenty of real
[Amit Varma]: believers. I mean, this is a society. Let's honestly, it's quite a hopeful note that you've
[Amit Varma]: struck that our politicians perhaps can eventually someday come to the rescue. Let's now talk about
[Amit Varma]: your reading habit, which I'm interested in. You said that the ideal kind of life for you
[Amit Varma]: is and your thick desire is that you're paid to read books. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: what your reading habit is like. Is there an intentionality to your reading habit as well,
[Amit Varma]: that at some point you decided that there is a certain amount of reading you do? Also, when you
[Amit Varma]: read, you know, do you take notes? What do you do for, you know, assimilating the knowledge that
[Amit Varma]: you gather for knowledge management? And how big is writing a part of that assimilation process?
[Guest]: Oh, wow. You know, one should not overvalorize reading. I mean, it's something I enjoy. You
[Guest]: know, there's that famous line of Hobbes, I don't know whether you've heard. So John Aubrey, who's
[Guest]: this 17th century gossip, you know, and writes these wonderful brief lives of all the kind of
[Guest]: big characters of 17th century. So he goes to Hobbes and says, you know, Mr. Hobbes,
[Guest]: people don't think you're a real scholar. I mean, obviously, Hobbes's political views
[Guest]: are controversial. Because you don't cite many people in your books, which gives them the
[Guest]: impression that you actually haven't read a whole lot. And Hobbes replies, he said,
[Guest]: if I had read as much as anyone else, I would have known only as much as anyone else.
[Guest]: So I think you can, you know, I mean, I think you can valorize. But I'm addicted to reading
[Guest]: in the sense that without a certain number of hours of it a day, it can vary. I mean,
[Guest]: that obviously varies by responsibility and where you are. This is just almost the sense of, you
[Guest]: know, when it's almost like an addiction in some ways. It's much less disciplined, I think. And
[Guest]: particularly now, where I think the temptation to gain lots of superficial knowledge in lots of
[Guest]: different fields, at least, even if you don't understand, you can say, okay, yes, this is the
[Guest]: question that we're asking, I think is, is, is much, much greater. The notes and stuff is so,
[Guest]: so anything that's in my core discipline, particularly political theory and philosophy,
[Guest]: of course, is not just detailed notes, but in some senses, the act of responding by writing,
[Guest]: not necessarily publishing, but at least you're kind of engaging with it, I think is,
[Guest]: is hugely important. And I actually find teaching does the wonders for your reading, you actually
[Guest]: read things differently when you have to teach it. Because you then have to really, in a sense,
[Guest]: clarify the logical presentation in a way in which, you know, sometimes reading you can skip
[Guest]: on. I used to do a lot of marginal notes, which partly because a larger proportion of the books
[Guest]: are now in electronic format, I mean, just for access reasons. I mean, you can highlight and
[Guest]: stuff, but I actually miss the dogmark books with all kinds of annotations. I think, you know,
[Guest]: you know, I think across, across the board. I do find, as you get older, talking of the dissolving
[Guest]: self, that the ability to retain structures and arguments, I think, still remains, but
[Guest]: the memory about, like, detail and facts, I think I used to be better at it, right? I mean,
[Guest]: and this is a gift often historians have, right? I think you find yourself struggling
[Guest]: with a little bit more with that now. And maybe it's just a kind of, you know, process of
[Guest]: aging, or at least I hope it's nothing more than that. And, you know, and, and, and it's
[Guest]: interesting how the memory works in some ways that it's, if you can figure out the architectonic,
[Guest]: it's easier to retain than, in a sense, trying to, you know, retain lots of details and narratives
[Guest]: and facts. So I've, I've become less in command of stories, I think, then, then, then I kind of
[Guest]: used to, even in the reading of fiction, I mean, you know, the broad outlines of the point,
[Guest]: the plot, the affect, if it made you think, all that remains, but the kinds of things that you
[Guest]: used to remember, which is, you know, lines from characters, textures of characters that I think,
[Guest]: and maybe it's just, oh, Lord, I mean, it could be just just be that, you know,
[Guest]: there's too much time on the screen. And so you're not processing it as as much.
[Amit Varma]: So final question for my listeners, and for me, you know, recommend some books,
[Amit Varma]: movies, or music or any kind of art that's that you love and that you want to share with the world.
[Guest]: Oh, gosh. So much. Academics are the wrong people to I think,
[Guest]: what kind of music do you listen to? So with music, it's mostly Hindustani
[Guest]: classical, I mean, that's about 75 to 80%. And otherwise, it's in these, I actually,
[Guest]: Western music, it'll be Western classical mostly, orchestral stuff. So it's, it's, I mean,
[Guest]: it's not, it's not a very surprising to the usual suspects, Beethoven, Mozart, Handel, Mendelssohn.
[Guest]: And actually, the one thing I would recommend, actually, for particularly people who are not
[Guest]: used to East and Western classical, the Berlin Philharmonic, they started this under COVID,
[Guest]: but they've actually put out a lot of this stuff online. And they also do like,
[Guest]: these 10 minute things, right? So it's a larger performance. And obviously, you have to
[Guest]: subscribe to pay access to the larger performance just digitally. But even the shorter things
[Guest]: are truly kind of extraordinary, if you're kind of, you know, feeling so that that that's actually
[Guest]: become the kind of, you know, you just look at the kind of Berlin Philharmonic's next release.
[Guest]: But otherwise, and I think with classical now, interestingly, after going through a phase where
[Guest]: I thought I had less patience, actually going back to longer compositions. Because one of the,
[Guest]: I think, interesting things about, you know, Indian classical and talk of empowerment is
[Guest]: the archive that is now publicly available. I mean, you know, we all grew up with Nikhil
[Guest]: Banerjee, but the repertoire we'd heard was probably like 20 recordings. Now it's probably
[Guest]: like 80, 100. And some of them are better than anything that was kind of published in his
[Guest]: published in his lifetime, right? So there's a way in which you you actually kind of recreate
[Guest]: your own sense of the history of that music and that performer. I think that's actually right now,
[Guest]: I think I think that's been more enticing in some ways, I think, than anything.
[Amit Varma]: Books, films,
[Guest]: God books. I think on fiction. I think the Hilary Mantel trilogy, I think is stunning,
[Guest]: particularly the third one, actually, people like the third less, but I thought it's a real
[Guest]: two, particularly, particularly if you're interested in politics. I mean, it's of a
[Guest]: kind of different order. I've been trying to read a lot more Hindi fiction. And I must confess,
[Guest]: I think people like Premchand, I had read at an age where you kind of miss most of it. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, you you read, there is such a thing as kind of rereading with a different, I think, lens.
[Guest]: There's an academic in Delhi University, a poor one, and the professor of
[Guest]: Hindi is a wonderful book on Premchand, actually, which, you know, apart from everything else,
[Guest]: is a kind of model of how to read sensitively, you know, and you just makes you look at the
[Guest]: stories very, very differently. And it's actually a meditation secularism, because that's a lot of
[Guest]: what the Premchand, I think, you know, story is, you know, stories about, I think a lot of,
[Guest]: you know, given the theme that we discussed, and this is a course I've been teaching and
[Guest]: hope to develop for that is this course on global political thought. And I have to say my
[Guest]: acquaintance with both Chinese political thought and broadly what's called Islamic political thought
[Guest]: was relatively cursory. I mean, in a new fair bit, some of the classics, but to actually kind
[Guest]: of engage, I think, as seriously with it. So the last year, I think a lot of it has, you know,
[Guest]: been kind of again, and this is that, that gives you a kind of very different perspective in some
[Guest]: senses on how people situated in these societies looking at normative questions and history.
[Guest]: And the quality of writing and scholarship is just stunning. I mean, I think. So I think we
[Guest]: are at the age where, you know, a lot of lateral reading, in some senses, I think, and drawing
[Guest]: lateral connections is probably much more interesting than kind of just digging down
[Guest]: in your own furrow.
[Amit Varma]: Pratap, thank you so much for coming on the show. I've really enjoyed talking to you.
[Guest]: Thank you so much. It's always, always a real treat and privilege to talk to you.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.